<doc id="34542" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34542" title="Zhang Heng">
Zhang Heng

Zhang Heng (Chinese:  張衡,  张衡,  "Zhāng Héng"; AD 78–139), formerly romanized as Chang Hêng, was a Han Chinese polymath from Nanyang who lived during the Han dynasty. Educated in the capital cities of Luoyang and Chang'an, he achieved success as an astronomer, mathematician, scientist, engineer, inventor, geographer, cartographer, artist, poet, statesman, and literary scholar.
Zhang Heng began his career as a minor civil servant in Nanyang. Eventually, he became Chief Astronomer, Prefect of the Majors for Official Carriages, and then Palace Attendant at the imperial court. His uncompromising stance on historical and calendrical issues led to his becoming a controversial figure, preventing him from rising to the status of Grand Historian. His political rivalry with the palace eunuchs during the reign of Emperor Shun (r. 125–144) led to his decision to retire from the central court to serve as an administrator of Hejian in Hebei. Zhang returned home to Nanyang for a short time, before being recalled to serve in the capital once more in 138. He died there a year later, in 139.
Zhang applied his extensive knowledge of mechanics and gears in several of his inventions. He invented the world's first water-powered armillary sphere to assist astronomical observation; improved the inflow water clock by adding another tank; and invented the world's first seismometer, which discerned the cardinal direction of an earthquake 500 km away. He improved previous Chinese calculations for pi. In addition to documenting about 2,500 stars in his extensive star catalog, Zhang also posited theories about the Moon and its relationship to the Sun: specifically, he discussed the Moon's sphericity, its illumination by reflected sunlight on one side and the hidden nature of the other, and the nature of solar and lunar eclipses. His "fu" (rhapsody) and "shi" poetry were renowned in his time and studied and analyzed by later Chinese writers. Zhang received many posthumous honors for his scholarship and ingenuity; some modern scholars have compared his work in astronomy to that of the Greco-Roman Ptolemy (AD 86–161).
Life of Zhang Heng.
Early life.
Born in the town of Xi'e in Nanyang Commandery (north of the modern Nanyang City in Henan province), Zhang Heng came from a distinguished but not very affluent family. His grandfather Zhang Kan had been governor of a commandery and one of the leaders who supported the restoration of the Han by Emperor Guangwu (r. 25–57), following the death of the usurping Wang Mang of the Xin (AD 9–23). At age ten, Zhang's father died, leaving him in the care of his mother and grandmother. An accomplished writer in his youth, Zhang left home in the year 95 to pursue his studies in the capitals of Chang'an and Luoyang. While traveling to Luoyang, Zhang passed by a hot spring near Mount Li and dedicated one of his earliest "fu" poems to it. This work, entitled ""Fu" on the Hot Springs" ("Wēnquán fù" 溫泉賦), describes the throngs of people attending the hot springs, which later became famous as the "Huaqing Hot Springs", a favorite retreat of imperial concubine Yang Guifei during the Tang dynasty. After studying for some years at Luoyang's Taixue, he was well-versed in the classics and friends with several notable persons, including the mathematician and calligrapher Cui Yuan (78–143), the official and philosophical commentator Ma Rong (79–166), and the philosopher Wang Fu (78–163). Government authorities offered Zhang appointments to several offices, including a position as one of the Imperial Secretaries, yet he acted modestly and declined. At age twenty-three, he returned home with the title "Officer of Merit in Nanyang", serving as the master of documents under the administration of Governor Bao De (in office from 103–111). As he was charged with composing inscriptions and dirges for the governor, he gained experience in writing official documents. As Officer of Merit in the commandery, he was also responsible for local appointments to office and recommendations to the capital of nominees for higher office. He spent much of his time composing rhapsodies on the capital cities. When Bao De was recalled to the capital in 111 to serve as a minister of finance, Zhang continued his literary work at home in Xi'e. Zhang Heng began his studies in astronomy at the age of thirty and began publishing his works on astronomy and mathematics.
Official career.
In 112, Zhang was summoned to the court of Emperor An (r. 106–125), who had heard of his expertise in mathematics. When he was nominated to serve at the capital, Zhang was escorted by carriage—a symbol of his official status—to Luoyang, where he became a court gentleman working for the Imperial Secretariat. He was promoted to Chief Astronomer for the court, serving his first term from 115–120 under Emperor An and his second under the succeeding emperor from 126–132. As Chief Astronomer, Zhang was a subordinate of the Minister of Ceremonies, one of Nine Ministers ranked just below the Three Excellencies. In addition to recording heavenly observations and portents, preparing the calendar, and reporting which days were auspicious and which ill-omened, Zhang was also in charge of an advanced literacy test for all candidates to the Imperial Secretariat and the Censorate, both of whose members were required to know at least 9,000 characters and all major writing styles. Under Emperor An, Zhang also served as Prefect of the Majors for Official Carriages under the Ministry of Guards, in charge of receiving memorials to the throne (formal essays on policy and administration) as well as nominees for official appointments.
When the government official Dan Song proposed the Chinese calendar should be reformed in 123 to adopt certain apocryphal teachings, Zhang opposed the idea. He considered the teachings to be of questionable stature and believed they could introduce errors. Others shared Zhang's opinion and the calendar was not altered, yet Zhang's proposal that apocryphal writings should be banned was rejected. The officials Liu Zhen and Liu Taotu, members of a committee to compile the dynastic history "Dongguan Hanji" (東觀漢記), sought permission from the court to consult Zhang Heng. However, Zhang was barred from assisting the committee due to his controversial views on apocrypha and his objection to the relegation of Emperor Gengshi's (r. 23–25) role in the restoration of the Han Dynasty as lesser than Emperor Guangwu's. Liu Zhen and Liu Taotu were Zhang's only historian allies at court, and after their deaths Zhang had no further opportunities for promotion to the prestigious post of court historian.
Despite this setback in his official career, Zhang was reappointed as Chief Astronomer in 126 after Emperor Shun of Han (r. 125–144) ascended to the throne. His intensive astronomical work was rewarded only with the rank and salary of 600 bushels, or "shi", of grain (mostly commuted to coin cash or bolts of silk). To place this number in context, in a hierarchy of twenty official ranks, the lowest-paid official earned the rank and salary of 100 bushels and the highest-paid official earned 10,000 bushels during the Han. The 600-bushel rank was the lowest the emperor could directly appoint to a central government position; any official of lower status was overseen by central or provincial officials of high rank.
In 132, Zhang introduced an intricate seismometer to the court, which he claimed could detect the precise cardinal direction of a distant earthquake. On one occasion his device indicated that an earthquake had occurred in the northwest. As there was no perceivable tremor felt in the capital his political enemies were briefly able to relish the failure of his device, until a messenger arrived shortly afterwards to report that an earthquake had occurred about 400 km (248 mi) to 500 km (310 mi) northwest of Luoyang in Gansu province.
A year after Zhang presented his seismometer to the court, officials and candidates were asked to provide comments about a series of recent earthquakes which could be interpreted as signs of displeasure from Heaven. The ancient Chinese viewed natural calamities as cosmological punishments for misdeeds that were perpetrated by the Chinese ruler or his subordinates on earth. In Zhang's memorial discussing the reasons behind these natural disasters, he criticized the new recruitment system of Zuo Xiong which fixed the age of eligible candidates for the title "Filial and Incorrupt" at age forty. The new system also transferred the power of the candidates' assessment to the Three Excellencies rather than the Generals of the Household, who by tradition oversaw the affairs of court gentlemen. Although Zhang's memorial was rejected, his status was significantly elevated soon after to Palace Attendant, a position he used to influence the decisions of Emperor Shun. With this prestigious new position, Zhang earned a salary of 2,000 bushels and had the right to escort the emperor.
As Palace Attendant to Emperor Shun, Zhang Heng attempted to convince him that the court eunuchs represented a threat to the imperial court. Zhang pointed to specific examples of past court intrigues involving eunuchs, and convinced Shun that he should assume greater authority and limit their influence. The eunuchs attempted to slander Zhang, who responded with a "fu" rhapsody called ""Fu" on Pondering the Mystery", which vents his frustration. Rafe de Crespigny states that Zhang's rhapsody used imagery similar to Qu Yuan's (340–278 BC) poem "Li Sao" and focused on whether or not good men should flee the corrupted world or remain virtuous within it.
Literature and poetry.
While working for the central court, Zhang Heng had access to a variety of written materials located in the Archives of the Eastern Pavilion. Zhang read many of the great works of history in his day and claimed he had found ten instances where the "Records of the Grand Historian" by Sima Qian (145–90 BC) and the "Book of Han" by Ban Gu (AD 32–92) differed from other ancient texts that were available to him. His account was preserved and recorded in the 5th century text of the "Book of Later Han" by Fan Ye (398–445). His rhapsodies and other literary works displayed a deep knowledge of classic texts, Chinese philosophy, and histories. He also compiled a commentary on the "Taixuan" (太玄, "Great Mystery") by the Daoist author Yang Xiong (53 BC–AD 18).
Xiao Tong (501–531), a crown prince of the Liang Dynasty (502–557), immortalized several of Zhang's works in his literary anthology, "Selections of Refined Literature (Wen xuan" 文選")". Zhang's rhapsodies (賦, "fu") include "Western Metropolis Rhapsody" (西京賦), "Eastern Metropolis Rhapsody" (東京賦), "Southern Capital Rhapsody" (南都賦), "Rhapsody on Contemplating the Mystery" (思玄賦), and "Rhapsody on Returning to the Fields" (歸田賦). The latter fuses Daoist ideas with Confucianism and was a precursor to later Chinese metaphysical nature poetry, according to Liu Wu-chi. A set of four short lyric poems ("shi" 詩) entitled "Lyric Poems on Four Sorrows" (四愁詩), is also included with Zhang's preface. This set constitutes some of the earliest heptasyllabic "shi" Chinese poetry written. While still in Luoyang, Zhang became inspired to write his "Western Metropolis Rhapsody" and "Eastern Metropolis Rhapsody", which were based on the "Rhapsody on the Two Capitals" by the historian Ban Gu. Zhang's work was similar to Ban's, although the latter fully praised the contemporaneous Eastern Han regime while Zhang provided a warning that it could suffer the same fate as the Western Han if it too declined into a state of decadence and moral depravity. These two works satirized and criticized what he saw as the excessive luxury of the upper classes. Zhang's "Southern Capital Rhapsody" commemorated his home city of Nanyang, home of the restorer of the Han Dynasty, Guangwu.
In Zhang Heng's poem "Four Sorrows", he laments that he is unable to woo a beautiful woman due to the impediment of mountains, snows and rivers. Rafe de Crespigny, Tong Xiao, and David R. Knechtges claim that Zhang wrote this as an innuendo hinting at his inability to keep in contact with the emperor, hindered by unworthy rivals and petty men. This poem is one of the first in China to have seven words per line. His "Four Sorrows" reads:
In another poem of his called "Stabilizing the Passions" (定情賦) — preserved in a Tang Dynasty (618–907) encyclopedia, but referred to earlier by Tao Qian (365–427) in praise of Zhang's lyrical minimalism — Zhang displays his admiration for an attractive and exemplary woman. This simpler type of "fu" poem influenced later works by the prominent official and scholar Cai Yong (132–192). Zhang wrote:
Zhang's long lyrical poems also revealed a great amount of information on urban layout and basic geography. His rhapsody "Sir Based-On-Nothing" provides details on terrain, palaces, hunting parks, markets, and prominent buildings of Chang'an, the Western Han capital. Exemplifying his attention to detail, his rhapsody on Nanyang described gardens filled with spring garlic, summer bamboo shoots, autumn leeks, winter rape-turnips, perilla, evodia, and purple ginger. Zhang Heng's writing confirms the size of the imperial hunting park in the suburbs of Chang'an, as his estimate for the circumference of the park's encircling wall agrees with the historian Ban Gu's estimate of roughly 400 "li" (one li in Han times was equal to 415.8 m, or 1,364 ft, making the circumference of the park wall 166,320 m, or 545,600 ft). Along with Sima Xiangru (179–117 BC), Zhang listed a variety of animals and hunting game inhabiting the park, which were divided in the northern and southern portions of the park according to where the animals had originally came from: northern or southern China. Somewhat similar to the description of Sima Xiangru, Zhang described the Western Han emperors and their entourage enjoying boat outings, water plays, fishing, and displays of archery targeting birds and other animals with stringed arrows from the tops of along Chang'an's Kunming Lake. The focus of Zhang's writing on specific places and their terrain, society, people, and their customs could also be seen as early attempts of ethnographic categorization. In his poem "Xijing fu", Zhang shows that he was aware of the new foreign religion of Buddhism, introduced via the Silk Road, as well as the legend of the birth of Buddha with the vision of the white elephant bringing about conception. In his "Western Metropolis Rhapsody" (西京賦), Zhang described court entertainments such as "juedi" (角抵), a form of theatrical wrestling accompanied by music in which participants butted heads with bull horn masks.
With his "Responding to Criticism" ("Ying jian" 應間), a work modeled on Yang Xiong's "Justification Against Ridicule", Zhang was an early writer and proponent of the Chinese literary genre "shelun", or hypothetical discourse. Authors of this genre created a written dialogue between themselves and an imaginary person (or a real person of their entourage or association); the latter poses questions to the author on how to lead a successful life. He also used it as a means to criticize himself for failing to obtain high office, but coming to the conclusion that the true gentleman displays virtue instead of greed for power. In this work, Dominik Declercq asserts that the person urging Zhang to advance his career in a time of government corruption most likely represented the eunuchs or Empress Liang Na's (116–150) powerful relatives in the Liang clan. Declercq states that these two groups would have been "anxious to know whether this famous scholar could be lured over to their side", but Zhang flatly rejected such an alignment by declaring in this politically charged piece of literature that his gentlemanly quest for virtue trumped any desire of his for power.
Zhang wrote about the various love affairs of emperors dissatisfied with the imperial harem, going out into the city incognito to seek out prostitutes and sing-song girls. This was seen as a general criticism of the Eastern Han emperors and their imperial favorites, guised in the criticism of earlier Western Han emperors. Besides criticizing the Western Han emperors for lavish decadence, Zhang also pointed out that their behavior and ceremonies did not properly conform with the Chinese cyclical beliefs in yin and yang. In a poem criticizing the previous Western Han Dynasty, Zhang wrote:
Achievements in science and technology.
Astronomy and mathematics.
For centuries the Chinese approximated pi as 3; Liu Xin (d. AD 23) made the first known Chinese attempt at a more accurate calculation of 3.1457, but there is no record detailing the method he used to obtain this figure. In his work around 130, Zhang Heng compared the celestial circle to the diameter of the earth, proportioning the former as 736 and the latter as 232, thus calculating pi as 3.1724. In Zhang's day, the ratio 4:3 was given for the area of a square to the area of its inscribed circle and the volume of a cube and volume of the inscribed sphere should also be 42:32. In formula, with D as diameter and V as volume, D3:V = 16:9 or V=formula_1D3; Zhang realized that the value for diameter in this formula was inaccurate, noting the discrepancy as the value taken for the ratio. Zhang then attempted to remedy this by amending the formula with an additional formula_2D3, hence V=formula_1D3 + formula_2D3 = formula_5D3. With the ratio of the volume of the cube to the inscribed sphere at 8:5, the implied ratio of the area of the square to the circle is √8:√5. From this formula, Zhang calculated pi as the square root of 10 (or approximately 3.162). Zhang also calculated pi as formula_6 = 3.1466 in his book "Ling Xian" (靈憲). In the 3rd century, Liu Hui made the calculation more accurate with his π algorithm, which allowed him to obtain the value 3.14159. Later, Zu Chongzhi (429–500) approximated pi as formula_7 or 3.141592, the most accurate calculation for pi the ancient Chinese would achieve.
In his publication of AD 120 called "The Spiritual Constitution of the Universe" (靈憲, "Ling Xian", lit. "Sublime Model"), Zhang Heng theorized that the universe was like an egg "as round as a crossbow pellet" with the stars on the shell and the Earth as the central yolk. This universe theory is congruent with the geocentric model as opposed to the heliocentric model. Although the ancient Warring States (403–221 BC) Chinese astronomers Shi Shen and Gan De had compiled China's first star catalogue in the 4th century BC, Zhang nonetheless catalogued 2,500 stars which he placed in a "brightly shining" category (the Chinese estimated the total to be 14,000), and he recognized 124 constellations. In comparison, this star catalogue featured many more stars than the 850 documented by the Greek astronomer Hipparchus (c. 190–c.120 BC) in his catalogue, and more than Ptolemy (AD 83–161), who catalogued over 1,000. Zhang supported the "radiating influence" theory to explain solar and lunar eclipses, a theory which was opposed by Wang Chong (AD 27–97). In the "Ling Xian", Zhang wrote:
The Sun is like fire and the Moon like water. The fire gives out light and the water reflects it. Thus the moon's brightness is produced from the radiance of the Sun, and the Moon's darkness is due to (the light of) the sun being obstructed. The side which faces the Sun is fully lit, and the side which is away from it is dark. The planets (as well as the Moon) have the nature of water and reflect light. The light pouring forth from the Sun does not always reach the moon owing to the obstruction of the earth itself—this is called 'an-xu', a lunar eclipse. When (a similar effect) happens with a planet (we call it) an occultation; when the Moon passes across (the Sun's path) then there is a solar eclipse.
Zhang Heng viewed these astronomical phenomena in supernatural terms as well. The signs of comets, eclipses, and movements of heavenly bodies could all be interpreted by him as heavenly guides on how to conduct affairs of state. Contemporary writers also wrote about eclipses and the sphericity of heavenly bodies. The music theorist and mathematician Jing Fang (78–37 BC) wrote about the spherical shape of the Sun and Moon while discussing eclipses:
The Moon and the planets are Yin; they have shape but no light. This they receive only when the Sun illuminates them. The former masters regarded the Sun as round like a crossbow bullet, and they thought the Moon had the nature of a mirror. Some of them recognized the Moon as a ball too. Those parts of the Moon which the Sun illuminates look bright, those parts which it does not, remain dark.
The theory posited by Zhang and Jing was supported by later pre-modern scientists such as Shen Kuo (1031–1095), who expanded on the reasoning of why the Sun and Moon were spherical.
Extra tank for inflow clepsydra.
The outflow clepsydra was a timekeeping device used in China as long ago as the Shang Dynasty (c. 1600–c. 1050 BC), and certainly by the Zhou Dynasty (1122–256 BC). The inflow clepsydra with an indicator rod on a float had been known in China since the beginning of the Han Dynasty in 202 BC and had replaced the outflow type. The Han Chinese noted the problem with the falling pressure head in the reservoir, which slowed the timekeeping of the device as the inflow vessel was filled. Zhang Heng was the first to address this problem, indicated in his writings from 117, by adding an extra compensating tank between the reservoir and the inflow vessel. Zhang also mounted two statuettes of a Chinese immortal and a heavenly guard on the top of the inflow clepsydra, the two of which would guide the indicator rod with their left hand and point out the graduations with their right. Joseph Needham states that this was perhaps the ancestor of all clock jacks that would later sound the hours found in mechanical clocks by the 8th century, but he notes that these figures did not actually move like clock jack figurines or sound the hours. Many additional compensation tanks were added to later clepsydras in the tradition of Zhang Heng. In 610 the Sui Dynasty (581–618) engineers Geng Xun and Yuwen Kai crafted an unequal-armed steelyard balance able to make seasonal adjustments in the pressure head of the compensating tank, so that it could control the rate of water flow for different lengths of day and night during the year. Zhang mentioned a "jade dragon's neck", which in later times meant a siphon. He wrote of the floats and indicator-rods of the inflow clepsydra as follows:
Bronze vessels are made and placed one above the other at different levels; they are filled with pure water. Each has at the bottom a small opening in the form of a 'jade dragon's neck'. The water dripping (from above) enters two inflow receivers (alternately), the left one being for the night and the right one for the day. On the covers of each (inflow receiver) there are small cast statuettes in gilt bronze; the left (night) one is an immortal and the right (day) one is a policeman. These figures guide the indicator-rod (lit. arrow) with their left hands, and indicate the graduations on it with their right hands, thus giving the time.
Water-powered armillary sphere.
Zhang Heng is the first person known to have applied hydraulic motive power (i.e. by employing a waterwheel and clepsydra) to rotate an armillary sphere, an astronomical instrument representing the celestial sphere. The Greek astronomer Eratosthenes (276–194 BC) invented the first armillary sphere in 255 BC. The Chinese armillary sphere was fully developed by 52 BC, with the astronomer Geng Shouchang's addition of a permanently fixed equatorial ring. In AD 84  the astronomers Fu An and Jia Kui added the ecliptic ring, and finally Zhang Heng added the horizon and meridian rings. This invention is described and attributed to Zhang in quotations by Hsu Chen and Li Shan, referencing his book "Lou Shui Chuan Hun Thien I Chieh" (Apparatus for Rotating an Armillary Sphere by Clepsydra Water). It was likely not an actual book by Zhang, but a chapter from his "Hun I" or "Hun I Thu Chu", written in 117 AD. His water-powered armillary influenced the design of later Chinese water clocks and led to the discovery of the escapement mechanism by the 8th century. The historian Joseph Needham (1900–1995) states:
What were the factors leading to the first escapement clock in China? The chief tradition leading to Yi Xing (AD 725 ) was of course the succession of 'pre-clocks' which had started with Zhang Heng about 125. Reason has been given for believing that these applied power to the slow turning movement of computational armillary spheres and celestial globes by means of a water-wheel using clepsydra drip, which intermittently exerted the force of a lug to act on the teeth of a wheel on a polar-axis shaft. Zhang Heng in his turn had composed this arrangement by uniting the armillary rings of his predecessors into the equatorial armillary sphere, and combining it with the principles of the water-mills and hydraulic trip-hammers which had become so widespread in Chinese culture in the previous century.
Zhang did not initiate the Chinese tradition of hydraulic engineering, which began during the mid Zhou Dynasty (c. 6th century BC), through the work of engineers such as Sunshu Ao and Ximen Bao. Zhang's contemporary, Du Shi, (d. AD 38) was the first to apply the motive power of waterwheels to operate the bellows of a blast furnace to make pig iron, and the cupola furnace to make cast iron. Zhang provided a valuable description of his water-powered armillary sphere in the treatise of 125, stating:
The equatorial ring goes around the belly of the armillary sphere 91 and 5/19 (degrees) away from the pole. The circle of the ecliptic also goes round the belly of the instrument at an angle of 24 (degrees) with the equator. Thus at the summer solstice the ecliptic is 67 (degrees) and a fraction away from the pole, while at the winter solstice it is 115 (degrees) and a fraction away. Hence (the points) where the ecliptic and the equator intersect should give the north polar distances of the spring and autumn equinoxes. But now (it has been recorded that) the spring equinox is 90 and 1/4 (degrees) away from the pole, and the autumn equinox is 92 and 1/4 (degrees) away. The former figure is adopted only because it agrees with the (results obtained by the) method of measuring solstitial sun shadows as embodied in the Xia (dynasty) calendar.
Zhang Heng's water-powered armillary sphere had profound effects on Chinese astronomy and mechanical engineering in later generations. His model and its complex use of gears greatly influenced the water-powered instruments of later astronomers such as Yi Xing (683–727), Zhang Sixun (fl. 10th century), Su Song (1020–1101), Guo Shoujing (1231–1316), and many others. Water-powered armillary spheres in the tradition of Zhang Heng's were used in the eras of the Three Kingdoms (220–280) and Jin Dynasty (265–420), yet the design for it was temporarily out of use between 317 and 418, due to invasions of northern Xiongnu nomads. Zhang Heng's old instruments were recovered in 418, when Emperor Wu of Liu Song (r. 420–422) captured the ancient capital of Chang'an. Although still intact, the graduation marks and the representations of the stars, Moon, Sun, and planets were quite worn down by time and rust. In 436, the emperor ordered Qian Luozhi, the Secretary of the Bureau of Astronomy and Calendar, to recreate Zhang's device, which he managed to do successfully. Qian's water-powered celestial globe was still in use at the time of the Liang Dynasty (502–557), and successive models of water-powered armillary spheres were designed in subsequent dynasties.
Zhang's seismograph.
From the earliest times, the Chinese were concerned with the destructive force of earthquakes. It was recorded in Sima Qian's "Records of the Grand Historian" of 91 BC that in 780 BC an earthquake had been powerful enough to divert the courses of three rivers. It was not known at the time that earthquakes were caused by the shifting of tectonic plates in the Earth's crust; instead, the people of the ancient Zhou Dynasty explained them as disturbances with cosmic yin and yang, along with the heavens' displeasure with acts committed (or the common peoples' grievances ignored) by the current ruling dynasty. These theories were ultimately derived from the ancient text of the "Yijing" (Book of Changes), in its fifty-first hexagram. There were other early theories about earthquakes, developed by those such as the ancient Greeks. Anaxagoras (c. 500–428 BC) believed that they were caused by excess water near the surface crust of the earth bursting into the Earth's hollows; Democritus (c. 460–370 BC) believed that the saturation of the Earth with water caused them; Anaximenes (c. 585–c. 525 BC) believed they were the result of massive pieces of the Earth falling into the cavernous hollows due to drying; and Aristotle (384–322 BC) believed they were caused by instability of vapor ("pneuma") caused by the drying of the moist Earth by the Sun's rays.
During the Han Dynasty, many learned scholars—including Zhang Heng—believed in the "oracles of the winds". These oracles of the occult observed the direction, force, and timing of the winds, to speculate about the operation of the cosmos and to predict events on Earth. These ideas influenced Zhang Heng's views on the cause of earthquakes. Against the grain of earlier theories proposed by his fellow Chinese and contemporary Greeks, Zhang Heng believed that earthquakes were caused by wind and air, writing:
The chief cause of earthquake is air, an element naturally swift and shifting from place to place. As long as it is not stirred, but lurks in a vacant space, it reposes innocently, giving no trouble to objects around it. But any cause coming upon it from without rouses it, or compresses it, and drives it into a narrow space ... and when opportunity of escape is cut off, then 'With deep murmur of the Mountain it roars around the barriers', which after long battering it dislodges and tosses on high, growing more fierce the stronger the obstacle with which it has contended.
In 132, Zhang Heng presented to the Han court what many historians consider to be his most impressive invention, the first seismometer. It was named "earthquake weathervane" ("houfeng didongyi" 候風地動儀, lit. instrument for measuring the seasonal winds and the movements of the Earth), and it was able to roughly determine the direction (out of eight directions) where the earthquake came from. According to the "Book of Later Han" (compiled by Fan Ye in the 5th century), his bronze urn-shaped device, with a swinging pendulum inside, was able to detect the direction of an earthquake hundreds of miles/kilometers away. This was essential for the Han government in sending quick aid and relief to regions devastated by this natural disaster. The "Book of Later Han" records that, on one occasion, Zhang's device was triggered, though no observer had felt any seismic disturbance; several days later a messenger arrived from the west and reported that an earthquake had occurred in Longxi (modern Gansu Province), the same direction that Zhang's device had indicated, and thus the court was forced to admit the efficacy of the device.
To indicate the direction of a distant earthquake, Zhang's device dropped a bronze ball from one of eight tubed projections shaped as dragon heads; the ball fell into the mouth of a corresponding metal object shaped as a toad, each representing a direction like the points on a compass rose. His device had eight mobile arms (for all eight directions) connected with cranks having catch mechanisms at the periphery. When tripped, a crank and right angle lever would raise a dragon head and release a ball which had been supported by the lower jaw of the dragon head. His device also included a vertical pin passing through a slot in the crank, a catch device, a pivot on a projection, a sling suspending the pendulum, an attachment for the sling, and a horizontal bar supporting the pendulum. Wang Zhenduo (王振鐸) argued that the technology of the Eastern Han era was sophisticated enough to produce such a device, as evidenced by contemporary levers and cranks used in other devices such as crossbow triggers.
Later Chinese of subsequent periods were able to reinvent Zhang's seismometer. They included the 6th-century mathematician and surveyor Xindu Fang of the Northern Qi Dynasty (550–577) and the astronomer and mathematician Lin Xiaogong of the Sui Dynasty (581–618). Like Zhang, Xindu Fang and Lin Xiaogong were given imperial patronage for their services in craftsmanship of devices for the court. By the time of the Yuan Dynasty (1271–1368), it was acknowledged that all devices previously made were preserved, except for that of the seismometer. This was discussed by the scholar Zhou Mi around 1290, who remarked that the books of Xindu Fang and Lin Xiaogong detailing their seismological devices were no longer to be found. Horwitz, Kreitner, and Needham speculate if Tang Dynasty (618–907) era seismographs found their way to contemporary Japan; according to Needham, "instruments of apparently traditional type there in which a pendulum carries pins projecting in many directions and able to pierce a surrounding paper cylinder, have been described."
Hong-sen Yan states that modern replicas of Zhang's device have failed to reach the level of accuracy and sensitivity described in Chinese historical records. Wang Zhenduo presented two different models of the seismometer based on the ancient descriptions of Zhang's device. In his 1936 reconstruction, the central pillar ("du zhu") of the device was a suspended pendulum acting as a movement sensor, while the central pillar of his second model in 1963 was an inverted pendulum. According to Needham, while working in the Seismological Observatory of Tokyo University in 1939, Akitsune Imamura and Hagiwara made a reconstruction of Zhang's device. While it was John Milne and Wang Zhenduo who argued early on that Zhang's "central pillar" was a suspended pendulum, Imamura was the first to propose an inverted model. He argued that transverse shock would have rendered Wang's immobilization mechanism ineffective, as it would not have prevented further motion that could knock other balls out of their position. On June 13, 2005, modern Chinese seismologists announced that they had successfully created a replica of the instrument.
Anthony J. Barbieri-Low, a Professor of Early Chinese History at the University of California, Santa Barbara, names Zhang Heng as one of several high-ranking Eastern-Han officials who engaged in crafts that were traditionally reserved for artisans ("gong" 工), such as mechanical engineering. Barbieri-Low speculates that Zhang only designed his seismometer, but did not actually craft the device himself. He asserts that this would most likely have been the job of artisans commissioned by Zhang. He writes: "Zhang Heng was an official of moderately high rank and could not be seen sweating in the foundries with the "gong" artisans and the government slaves. Most likely, he worked collaboratively with the professional casters and mold makers in the imperial workshops."
Cartography.
The Wei (220–265) and Jin Dynasty (265–420) cartographer and official Pei Xiu (224–271) was the first in China to describe in full the geometric grid reference for maps that allowed for precise measurements using a graduated scale, as well as topographical elevation. However, map-making in China had existed since at least the 4th century BC with the Qin state maps found in Gansu in 1986. Pinpointed accuracy of the winding courses of rivers and familiarity with scaled distance had been known since the Qin and Han Dynasty, respectively, as evidenced by their existing maps, while the use of a rectangular grid had been known in China since the Han as well. Historian Howard Nelson states that, although the accounts of Zhang Heng's work in cartography are somewhat vague and sketchy, there is ample written evidence that Pei Xiu derived the use of the rectangular grid reference from the maps of Zhang Heng. Rafe de Crespigny asserts that it was Zhang who established the rectangular grid system in Chinese cartography. Needham points out that the title of his book "Flying Bird Calendar" may have been a mistake, and that the book is more accurately entitled "Bird's Eye Map". Historian Florian C. Reiter notes that Zhang's narrative "Guitian fu" contains a phrase about applauding the maps and documents of Confucius of the Zhou Dynasty, which Reiter suggests places maps ("tu") on a same level of importance with documents ("shu"). It is documented that a physical geography map was first presented by Zhang Heng in 116 AD, called a "Ti Hsing Thu".
Odometer and south-pointing chariot.
Zhang Heng is often credited with inventing the first odometer, an achievement also attributed to Archimedes (c. 287–212 BC) and Heron of Alexandria (fl. AD 10–70). Similar devices were used by the Roman and Han-Chinese empires at about the same period. By the 3rd century, the Chinese had termed the device the "ji li gu che", or "li-recording drum carriage" (the modern measurement of li = 500 m/1640 ft).
Ancient Chinese texts describe the mechanical carriage's functions; after one li was traversed, a mechanically driven wooden figure struck a drum, and after ten li had been covered, another wooden figure struck a gong or a bell with its mechanically operated arm. However, there is evidence to suggest that the invention of the odometer was a gradual process in Han Dynasty China that centered around the "huang men"—court people (i.e. eunuchs, palace officials, attendants and familiars, actors, acrobats, etc.) who followed the musical procession of the royal "drum-chariot". There is speculation that at some time during the 1st century BC the beating of drums and gongs was mechanically driven by the rotation of the road wheels. This might have actually been the design of Luoxia Hong (c. 110 BC), yet by at least 125 the mechanical odometer carriage was already known, as it was depicted in a mural of the Xiao Tang Shan Tomb.
The south-pointing chariot was another mechanical device credited to Zhang Heng. It was a non-magnetic compass vehicle in the form of a two-wheeled chariot. Differential gears driven by the chariot's wheels allowed a wooden figurine (in the shape of a Chinese state minister) to constantly point to the south, hence its name. The "Song Shu" (c. AD 500 ) records that Zhang Heng re-invented it from a model used in the Zhou Dynasty era, but the violent collapse of the Han Dynasty unfortunately did not allow it to be preserved. Whether Zhang Heng invented it or not, Ma Jun (200–265) succeeded in creating the chariot in the following century.
Legacy.
Science and technology.
Zhang Heng's mechanical inventions influenced later Chinese inventors such as Yi Xing, Zhang Sixun, Su Song, and Guo Shoujing. Su Song directly named Zhang's water-powered armillary sphere as the inspiration for his 11th-century clock tower. The cosmic model of nine points of Heaven corresponding with nine regions of earth conceived in the work of the scholar-official Chen Hongmou (1696–1771) followed in the tradition of Zhang's book "Spiritual Constitution of the Universe". The seismologist John Milne, who created the modern seismograph in 1876 alongside Thomas Gray and James A. Ewing at the Imperial College of Engineering in Tokyo, commented in 1886 on Zhang Heng's contributions to seismology. The historian Joseph Needham emphasized his contributions to pre-modern Chinese technology, stating that Zhang was noted even in his day for being able to "make three wheels rotate as if they were one." More than one scholar has described Zhang as a polymath. However, some scholars also point out that Zhang's writing lacks concrete scientific theories. Comparing Zhang with his contemporary, Ptolemy (83–161) of Roman Egypt, Jin Guantao, Fan Hongye, and Liu Qingfeng state:
Poetic literature.
Zhang's poetry was widely read during his life and after his death. In addition to the compilation of Xiao Tong mentioned above, the Eastern Wu official Xue Zong (d. 237) wrote commentary on Zhang's poems "Dongjing fu" and "Xijing fu". The influential poet Tao Qian wrote that he admired the poetry of Zhang Heng for its "curbing extravagant diction and aiming at simplicity", in regards to perceived tranquility and rectitude correlating with the simple but effective language of the poet. Tao wrote that both Zhang Heng and Cai Yong "avoided inflated language, aiming chiefly at simplicity", and adding that their "compositions begin by giving free expression to their fancies but end on a note of quiet, serving admirably to restrain undisciplined and passionate nature".
Posthumous honors.
Zhang was given great honors in life and in death. The philosopher and poet Fu Xuan (217–278) of the Wei and Jin dynasties once lamented in an essay over the fact that Zhang Heng was never placed in the Ministry of Works. Writing highly of Zhang and the 3rd-century mechanical engineer Ma Jun, Fu Xuan wrote, "Neither of them was ever an official of the Ministry of Works, and their ingenuity did not benefit the world. When (authorities) employ personnel with no regard to special talent, and having heard of genius neglect even to test it—is this not hateful and disastrous?"
In honor of Zhang's achievements in science and technology, his friend Cui Ziyu (Cui Yuan) wrote a memorial inscription on his burial stele, which has been preserved in the "Guwen yuan". Cui stated, "[Zhang Heng's] mathematical computations exhausted (the riddles of) the heavens and the earth. His inventions were comparable even to those of the Author of Change. The excellence of his talent and the splendour of his art were one with those of the gods." The minor official Xiahou Zhan (243–291) of the Wei Dynasty made an inscription for his own commemorative stele to be placed at Zhang Heng's tomb. It read: "Ever since gentlemen have composed literary texts, none has been as skillful as the Master [Zhang Heng] in choosing his words well ... if only the dead could rise, oh I could then turn to him for a teacher!"
Several things have been named after Zhang in modern times, including the lunar crater Chang Heng, the asteroid 1802 Zhang Heng, and the mineral Zhanghengite.
References.
Bibliography.
</dl>

</doc>
<doc id="34545" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34545" title="1960s">
1960s

The 1960s was a decade that began on 1 January 1960 and ended on 31 December 1969.
The 1960s term also refers to an era more often called the Sixties, denoting the complex of inter-related cultural and political trends around the globe. This "cultural decade" is more loosely defined than the actual decade, beginning around 1963 and ending around 1974.
"The Sixties", as they are known in both scholarship and popular culture, is a term used by historians, journalists, and other objective academics; in some cases nostalgically to describe the counterculture and revolution in social norms about clothing, music, drugs, dress, sexuality, formalities, and schooling; and in others pejoratively to denounce the decade as one of irresponsible excess, flamboyance, and decay of social order. The decade was also labeled the Swinging Sixties because of the fall or relaxation of social taboos especially relating to racism and sexism that occurred during this time. Commentator Christopher Booker described this era as a classical Jungian nightmare cycle, where a rigid culture, unable to contain the demands for greater individual freedom, broke free of the social constraints of the previous age through extreme deviation from the norm. He charts the rise, success, fall/nightmare and explosion in the London scene of the 1960s. Several Western nations such as the United States, United Kingdom, France, and West Germany turned to the political left in the early and mid-1960s.
In response to civil disobedience campaigns from groups like the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), U.S. President John F. Kennedy, a Keynesian and staunch anti-communist, pushed for social reforms. Kennedy's assassination in 1963 was a shock. Liberal reforms were finally passed under Lyndon B. Johnson including civil rights for African Americans and healthcare for the elderly and the poor. Despite his large-scale Great Society programs, Johnson was increasingly reviled by the New Left at home and abroad. The heavy-handed American role in the Vietnam War outraged student protestors around the globe. The assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. upon working with underpaid Tennessee garbage collectors and the anti-Vietnam War movement, and the police response towards protesters of the 1968 Democratic National Convention, defined politics of violence in the United States.
In Western Europe and Japan, organizations such as those present at May 1968, the Red Army Faction, and the Zengakuren tested liberal democracy's ability to satisfy its marginalized or alienated citizenry amidst post-industrial age hybrid capitalist economies. In Britain, the Labour Party gained power in 1964. In France, the protests of 1968 led to President Charles de Gaulle temporarily fleeing the country. For some, May 1968 meant the end of traditional collective action and the beginning of a new era to be dominated mainly by the so-called new social movements. Italy formed its first left-of-center government in March 1962 with a coalition of Christian Democrats, Social Democrats, and moderate Republicans. Socialists joined the ruling block in December 1963. In Brazil, João Goulart became president after Jânio Quadros resigned. In Africa the 1960s was a period of radical political change as 32 countries gained independence from their European colonial rulers.
Politics and wars.
Coups.
Prominent coups d'état of the decade included:
US Economics.
The decade began with a recession from 1960–61, at that time unemployment was considered high at around 7%. In his campaign John F. Kennedy promised to "get America moving again." His goal was economic growth of 4-6% per year and unemployment below 4%, to do this he instituted a 7% tax credit for businesses that invest in new plants and equipment. By the end of the decade median family income had risen from $8,540 in 1963 to $10,770 by 1969.
Although the first half of the decade had low inflation, by 1966 Kennedy's tax credit had reduced unemployment to 3.7% and inflation remained below 2%. With the economy booming Johnson began his "Great Society" which vastly expanded social programs. By the end of the decade under Nixon, the combined inflation and unemployment rate known as the misery index (economics) had exploded to nearly 10% with inflation at 6.2% and unemployment at 3.5% and by 1975 the misery index was almost 20%.
Assassinations.
The 1960s were marked by several notable assassinations:
Disasters.
Natural:
Non-natural:
Social and political movements.
Counterculture/social revolution.
In the second half of the decade, young people began to revolt against the conservative norms of the time, as well as remove themselves from mainstream liberalism, in particular the high level of materialism which was so common during the era. This created a "counterculture" that sparked a social revolution throughout much of the Western world. It began in the United States as a reaction against the conservatism and social conformity of the 1950s, and the US government's extensive military intervention in Vietnam. The youth involved in the popular social aspects of the movement became known as hippies. These groups created a movement toward liberation in society, including the sexual revolution, questioning authority and government, and demanding more freedoms and rights for women and minorities. The Underground Press, a widespread, eclectic collection of newspapers served as a unifying medium for the counterculture. The movement was also marked by the first widespread, socially accepted drug use (including LSD and marijuana) and psychedelic music.
Anti-war movement.
The war in Vietnam would eventually lead to a commitment of over half a million American troops, resulting in over 58,500 American deaths and producing a large-scale antiwar movement in the United States. As late as the end of 1965, few Americans protested the American involvement in Vietnam, but as the war dragged on and the body count continued to climb, civil unrest escalated. Students became a powerful and disruptive force and university campuses sparked a national debate over the war. As the movement's ideals spread beyond college campuses, doubts about the war also began to appear within the administration itself. A mass movement began rising in opposition to the Vietnam War, ending in the massive Moratorium protests in 1969, as well as the movement of resistance to conscription ("the Draft") for the war.
The antiwar movement was initially based on the older 1950s Peace movement, heavily influenced by the American Communist Party, but by the mid-1960s it outgrew this and became a broad-based mass movement centered in universities and churches: one kind of protest was called a "sit-in". Other terms heard in the United States included "the Draft", "draft dodger", "conscientious objector", and "Vietnam vet". Voter age-limits were challenged by the phrase: "If you're old enough to die for your country, you're old enough to vote."
Civil Rights Movement.
Beginning in the mid-1950s and continuing into the late 1960s, African-Americans in the United States aimed at outlawing racial discrimination against black Americans and restoring voting rights to them. This article covers the phase of the movement between 1955 and 1968, particularly in the South. The emergence of the Black Power Movement, which lasted roughly from 1966 to 1975, enlarged the aims of the Civil Rights Movement to include racial dignity, economic and political self-sufficiency, and anti-imperialism.
The movement was characterized by major campaigns of civil resistance. Between 1955 and 1968, acts of civil disobedience and nonviolent protest produced crisis situations between activists and government authorities. Federal, state, and local governments, businesses, and communities often had to respond immediately to these situations that highlighted the inequities faced by African Americans. Forms of protest and/or civil disobedience included boycotts such as the successful Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955–1956) in Alabama; "sit-ins" such as the influential Greensboro sit-ins (1960) in North Carolina; marches, such as the Selma to Montgomery marches (1965) in Alabama; and a wide range of other nonviolent activities.
Noted legislative achievements during this phase of the Civil Rights Movement were passage of Civil Rights Act of 1964, that banned discrimination based on "race, color, religion, or national origin" in employment practices and public accommodations; the Voting Rights Act of 1965, that restored and protected voting rights; the Immigration and Nationality Services Act of 1965, that dramatically opened entry to the U.S. to immigrants other than traditional European groups; and the Fair Housing Act of 1968, that banned discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
Hispanic and Chicano Movement.
Another large ethnic minority group, the Mexican-Americans, are among other Hispanics in the U.S. who fought to end racial discrimination and socioeconomic disparity. The largest Mexican-American populations was in the Southwestern United States, such as California with over 1 million "Chicanos" in Los Angeles alone, and Texas where Jim Crow laws included Mexican-Americans as "non-white" in some instances to be legally segregated.
Socially, the Chicano Movement addressed what it perceived to be negative ethnic stereotypes of Mexicans in mass media and the American consciousness. It did so through the creation of works of literary and visual art that validated Mexican-American ethnicity and culture. Chicanos fought to end social stigmas such as the usage of the Spanish language and advocated official bilingualism in federal and state governments.
The Chicano Movement also addressed discrimination in public and private institutions. Early in the twentieth century, Mexican Americans formed organizations to protect themselves from discrimination. One of those organizations, the League of United Latin American Citizens, was formed in 1929 and remains active today.
The movement gained momentum after World War II when groups such as the American G.I. Forum, which was formed by returning Mexican American veterans, joined in the efforts by other civil rights organizations.
Mexican-American civil-rights activists achieved several major legal victories including the 1947 "Mendez v. Westminster" U.S. Supreme Court ruling which declared that segregating children of "Mexican and Latin descent" was unconstitutional and the 1954 "Hernandez v. Texas" ruling which declared that Mexican Americans and other racial groups in the United States were entitled to equal protection under the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
The most prominent civil-rights organization in the Mexican-American community, the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF), was founded in 1968. Although modeled after the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, MALDEF has also taken on many of the functions of other organizations, including political advocacy and training of local leaders.
Meanwhile, Puerto Ricans in the U.S. mainland fought against racism, police brutality and socioeconomic problems affecting the three million Puerto Ricans residing in 50 states, the main concentration was in New York City.
In the 1960s and the following 1970s, Hispanic-American culture was on the rebound like ethnic music, foods, culture and identity both became popular and assimilated into the American mainstream. Spanish-language television networks, radio stations and newspapers increased in presence across the country, especially in US-Mexican border towns and East Coast cities like New York City, and the growth of the Cuban American community in Miami, Florida.
The multitude of discrimination at this time represented an inhuman side to a society that in the 1960s was upheld as a world and industry leader. The issues of civil rights and warfare became major points of reflection of virtue and democracy, what once was viewed as traditional and inconsequential was now becoming the significance in the turning point of a culture. A document known as the Port Huron Statement exemplifies these two conditions perfectly in its first hand depiction, "while these and other problems either directly oppressed us or rankled our consciences and became our own subjective concerns, we began to see complicated and disturbing paradoxes in our surrounding America. The declaration "all men are created equal..." rang hollow before the facts of Negro life in the South and the big cities of the North. The proclaimed peaceful intentions of the United States contradicted its economic and military investments in the Cold War status quo." These intolerable issues became too visible to ignore therefore its repercussions were feared greatly, the realization that we as individuals take the responsibility for encounter and resolution in our lives issues was an emerging idealism of the 1960s.
Second-wave feminism.
A second wave of feminism in the United States and around the world gained momentum in the early 1960s. While the first wave of the early 20th century was centered on gaining suffrage and overturning "de jure" inequalities, the second wave was focused on changing cultural and social norms and "de facto" inequalities associated with women. At the time, a woman's place was generally seen as being in the home, and they were excluded from many jobs and professions. Commercials often portrayed a woman as being helpless if her car broke down. In the US, a Presidential Commission on the Status of Women found discrimination against women in the workplace and every other aspect of life, a revelation which launched two decades of prominent women-centered legal reforms (i.e., the Equal Pay Act of 1963, Title IX, etc.) which broke down the last remaining legal barriers to women's personal freedom and professional success. Feminists took to the streets, marching and protesting, writing books and debating to change social and political views that limited women. In 1963, with Betty Friedan's revolutionary book, "The Feminine Mystique", the role of women in society, and in public and private life was questioned. By 1966, the movement was beginning to grow in size and power as women's group spread across the country and Friedan, along with other feminists, founded the National Organization for Women. In 1968, "Women's Liberation" became a household term as, for the first time, the new women's movement eclipsed the Civil Rights Movement when New York Radical Women, led by Robin Morgan, protested the annual Miss America pageant in Atlantic City, New Jersey. The movement continued throughout the next decades. Gloria Steinem was a key feminist.
Gay rights movement.
The United States, in the middle of a social revolution, led the world in LGBT rights in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Inspired by the civil-rights movement and the women's movement, early gay-rights pioneers had begun, by the 1960s, to build a movement. These groups were rather conservative in their practices, emphasizing that "gay men and women are no different from those who are straight" and deserve full equality. This philosophy would be dominant again after AIDS, but by the very end of the 1960s, the movement's goals would change and become more radical, demanding a right to be different, and encouraging gay pride.
The symbolic birth of the gay rights movement would not come until the decade had almost come to a close. Gays were not allowed by law to congregate. Gay establishments such as the Stonewall Inn in New York City were routinely raided by the police to arrest gay people. On a night in late June 1969, LGBT people resisted, for the first time, a police raid, and rebelled openly in the streets. This uprising called the Stonewall Riots began a new period of the LGBT rights movement that in the next decade would cause dramatic change both inside the LGBT community and in the mainstream American culture.
New Left.
The rapid rise of a "New Left" applied the class perspective of Marxism to postwar America, but had little organizational connection with older Marxist organizations such as the Communist Party, and even went as far as to reject organized labor as the basis of a unified left-wing movement. Sympathetic to the ideology of C. Wright Mills, the New Left differed from the traditional left in its resistance to dogma and its emphasis on personal as well as societal change. Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) became the organizational focus of the New Left and was the prime mover behind the opposition to the War in Vietnam. The 1960s left also consisted of ephemeral campus-based Trotskyist, Maoist and anarchist groups, some of which by the end of the 1960s had turned to militancy.
Crime.
The 1960s was also associated with a large increase in crime and urban unrest of all types. Between 1960 and 1969 reported incidences of violent crime per 100,000 people in the United States nearly doubled and have yet to return to the levels of the early 1960s. Large riots broke out in many cities like Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, New York City, Newark, New Jersey, Oakland, California and Washington, D.C. By the end of the decade, politicians like George Wallace and Richard Nixon campaigned on restoring law and order to a nation troubled with the new unrest.
Science and technology.
Science.
Space exploration.
The Space Race between the United States and the Soviet Union dominated the 1960s. The Soviets sent the first man, Yuri Gagarin, into outer space during the Vostok 1 mission on 12 April 1961 and scored a host of other successes, but by the middle of the decade the U.S. was taking the lead. In May 1961, President Kennedy set for the U.S. the goal of a manned spacecraft landing on the Moon by the end of the decade.
In June 1963, Valentina Tereshkova became the first woman in space.
In 1965, Soviets launched the first probe to hit another planet of the Solar system (Venus), Venera 3, and the first probe to make a soft landing on and transmit from the surface of the moon, Luna 9. In March 1966, the Soviet Union launched Luna 10, which became the first space probe to enter orbit around the Moon.
The deaths of astronauts Gus Grissom, Edward Higgins White, and Roger B. Chaffee in the Apollo 1 fire on 27 January 1967, put a temporary hold on the U.S. space program, but afterward progress was steady, with the Apollo 8 crew (Frank Borman, Jim Lovell, William Anders) being the first manned mission to orbit another celestial body (the moon) during Christmas of 1968.
On 20 July 1969, Apollo 11, the first human spaceflight landed on the Moon. Launched on 16 July 1969, it carried mission Commander Neil Armstrong, Command Module Pilot Michael Collins, and the Lunar Module Pilot Buzz Aldrin. Apollo 11 fulfilled President John F. Kennedy's goal of reaching the moon by the end of the 1960s, which he had expressed during a speech given before a joint session of Congress on 25 May 1961: "I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth."
The Soviet program lost its sense of direction with the death of chief designer Sergey Korolyov in 1966. Political pressure, conflicts between different design bureaus, and engineering problems caused by an inadequate budget would doom the Soviet attempt to land men on the moon.
A succession of unmanned American and Soviet probes traveled to the Moon, Venus, and Mars during the 1960s, and commercial satellites also came into use.
Technology.
Automobiles.
As the 1960s began, American cars showed a rapid rejection of 1950s styling excess, and would remain relatively clean and boxy for the entire decade. The horsepower race reached its climax in the late 1960s, with muscle cars sold by most makes. The compact Ford Mustang, launched in 1964, was one of the decade's greatest successes. The "Big Three" American automakers enjoyed their highest ever sales and profitability in the 1960s, but the demise of Studebaker in 1966 left American Motors Corporation as the last significant independent. The decade would see the car market split into different size classes for the first time, and model lineups now included compact and mid-sized cars in addition to full-sized ones.
The popular modern hatchback, with front-wheel-drive and a two-box configuration, was born in 1965 with the introduction of the Renault 16，many of this car's design principles live on in its modern counterparts: a large rear opening incorporating the rear window, foldable rear seats to extend boot space. The Mini, released in 1959, had first popularised the front wheel drive two-box configuration, but technically was not a hatchback as it had a fold-down bootlid.
Japanese cars also began to gain acceptance in the Western market, and popular economy models such as the Toyota Corolla, Datsun 510, and the first popular Japanese sports car, the Datsun 240Z, were released in the mid- to late-1960s.
Popular culture.
The counterculture movement dominated the second half of the 1960s, its most famous moments being the Summer of Love in San Francisco in 1967, and the Woodstock Festival in upstate New York in 1969. Psychedelic drugs, especially LSD, were widely used medicinally, spiritually and recreationally throughout the late 1960s, and were popularized by Timothy Leary with his slogan "Turn on, tune in, drop out". Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters also played a part in the role of "turning heads on". Psychedelic influenced the music, artwork and films of the decade, and a number of prominent musicians died of drug overdoses (see 27 Club). There was a growing interest in Eastern religions and philosophy, and many attempts were made to found communes, which varied from supporting free love to religious puritanism.
 "The 60′s were a leap in human consciousness. Mahatma Gandhi, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Che Guevara, Mother Teresa, they led a revolution of conscience. The Beatles, The Doors, Jimi Hendrix created revolution and evolution themes. The music was like Dalí, with many colors and revolutionary ways. The youth of today must go there to find themselves."
 – Carlos Santana
Popular music entered an era of "all hits", as numerous artists released recordings, beginning in the 1950s, as 45-rpm "singles" (with another on the flip side), and radio stations tended to play only the most popular of the wide variety of records being made. Also, bands tended to record only the best of their songs as a chance to become a hit record. The taste of the American listeners expanded from the folksinger, doo-wop and saxophone sounds of the 1950s to the Motown sound, folk rock and the British Invasion led by The Beatles in 1964. The Los Angeles and San Francisco Sound began in this period with many popular bands coming out of LA and the Haight-Ashbury district, well known for its hippie culture. The rise of the counterculture movement, particularly among the youth, created a market for rock, soul, pop, reggae and blues music.
Significant events in music in the 1960s:
Film.
The highest-grossing film of the decade was 20th Century Fox's "The Sound of Music" (1965).
Some of Hollywood's most notable blockbuster films of the 1960s include:
The counterculture movement had a significant effect on cinema. Movies began to break social taboos such as sex and violence causing both controversy and fascination. They turned increasingly dramatic, unbalanced, and hectic as the cultural revolution was starting. This was the beginning of the New Hollywood era that dominated the next decade in theatres and revolutionized the film industry. Films of this time also focused on the changes happening in the world. Dennis Hopper's "Easy Rider" (1969) focused on the drug culture of the time. Movies also became more sexually explicit, such as Roger Vadim's" Barbarella" (1968) as the counterculture progressed.
In Europe, Art Cinema gains wider distribution and sees movements like la Nouvelle Vague (The French New Wave) featuring French filmmakers such as Roger Vadim, François Truffaut, Alain Resnais, and Jean-Luc Godard; Cinéma Vérité documentary movement in Canada, France and the United States; Swedish filmmaker Ingmar Bergman, Chilean filmmaker Alexandro Jodorowsky and Polish filmmakers Roman Polanski and Wojciech Jerzy Has produced original and offbeat masterpieces and the high-point of Italian filmmaking with Michelangelo Antonioni and Federico Fellini making some of their most known films during this period. Notable films from this period include: "La Dolce Vita", "8½"; "La Notte"; "L'Eclisse", "The Red Desert"; "Blowup"; "Fellini Satyricon"; "Accattone"; "The Gospel According to St. Matthew"; "Theorem"; "Winter Light"; "The Silence"; "Persona"; "Shame"; "A Passion"; "Au Hasard Balthazar"; "Mouchette"; "Last Year at Marienbad"; "Chronique d'un été"; "Titicut Follies"; "High School"; "Salesman"; "La jetée"; "Warrendale;" "Knife in the Water"; "Repulsion"; "The Saragossa Manuscript"; "El Topo"; "A Hard Day's Night"; and the cinema verite "Dont Look Back".
In Japan, a film version of the story of the forty-seven ronin entitled "" directed by Hiroshi Inagaki was released in 1962, the legendary story was also remade as a television series in Japan. Academy Award winning Japanese director Akira Kurosawa produced "Yojimbo" (1961), and "Sanjuro" (1962), which both starred Toshiro Mifune as a mysterious Samurai swordsman for hire. Like his previous films both had a profound influence around the world. The "Spaghetti Western" genre was a direct outgrowth of the Kurosawa films. The influence of these films is most apparent in Sergio Leone's "A Fistful of Dollars" (1964) starring Clint Eastwood and Walter Hill's "Last Man Standing" (1996). "Yojimbo" was also the origin of the "Man with No Name" trend which included Sergio Leone's "For a Few Dollars More", and "The Good, The Bad and The Ugly" both also starring Clint Eastwood, and arguably continued through his 1968 opus "Once Upon a Time in the West", starring Henry Fonda, Charles Bronson, Claudia Cardinale, and Jason Robards. "The Magnificent Seven" a 1960 American western film directed by John Sturges was a remake of Akira Kurosawa's 1954 film, "Seven Samurai".
The 1960s were also about experimentation. With the explosion of light-weight and affordable cameras, the underground avant-garde film movement thrived. Canada's Michael Snow, Americans Kenneth Anger, Stan Brakhage, Andy Warhol, and Jack Smith. Notable films in this genre are: "Dog Star Man"; "Scorpio Rising"; "Wavelength"; "Chelsea Girls"; "Blow Job"; "Vinyl"; "Flaming Creatures".
Significant events in the film industry in the 1960s:
Television.
The most prominent American TV series of the 1960s include: "The Ed Sullivan Show", "Star Trek", "Peyton Place", "The Twilight Zone", "The Outer Limits", "The Andy Williams Show", "The Dean Martin Show", "The Wonderful World of Disney", "Alfred Hitchcock Presents", "The Beverly Hillbillies", "Bonanza", "Batman", "McHale's Navy", "Laugh-In", "The Dick Van Dyke Show", "The Fugitive", "The Tonight Show", "Gunsmoke", "The Andy Griffith Show", "Gilligan's Island, ", "The Flintstones", "The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet", "Lassie", "The Danny Thomas Show", "The Lucy Show", "My Three Sons", "The Red Skelton Show", "Bewitched" and "I Dream of Jeannie". "The Flintstones" was a favoured show, receiving 40 million views an episode with an average of 3 views a day. Some programming such as "The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour" became controversial by challenging the foundations of America's corporate and governmental controls; making fun of world leaders, and questioning U.S. involvement in and escalation of the Vietnam War.
Walt Disney, the founder of the Walt Disney Co. died on 15 December 1966, from a major tumor in his left lung.
Fashion.
Significant fashion trends of the 1960s include:
Sports.
Olympics.
There were six Olympic Games held during the decade. These were:
Association football.
There were two FIFA World Cups during the decade:
Baseball.
Major League Baseball expansion in 1961 included the formation of the Los Angeles Angels, the move to Minnesota to become the Minnesota Twins by the former Washington Senators and the formation of a new franchise called the Washington Senators. Major League Baseball sanctioned both the Houston Colt .45s and the New York Mets as new National League franchises in 1962.
In 1969, the American League expanded when the Kansas City Royals and Seattle Pilots, were admitted to the league prompting the expansion of the post-season for the first time since the creation of the World Series. The Pilots stayed just one season in Seattle before moving and becoming the Milwaukee Brewers in 1970. The National League also added two teams in 1969, the Montreal Expos and San Diego Padres. By 1969, at the end of the 1960s the New York Mets won the World Series in only the 8th year of the team's existence.
Disc Sports (Frisbee).
Alternative sports, using the flying disc, began in the mid-sixties. As numbers of young people became alienated from social norms, they resisted and looked for alternatives. They would form what would become known as the counterculture. The forms of escape and resistance would manifest in many ways including social activism, alternative lifestyles, experimental living through foods, dress, music and alternative recreational activities, including that of throwing a Frisbee. Starting with promotional efforts from Wham-O and Irwin Toy (Canada), a few tournaments and professionals using Frisbee show tours to perform at universities, fairs and sporting events, disc sports such as freestyle, double disc court, guts, disc ultimate and disc golf became this sports first events. Two sports, the team sport of disc ultimate and disc golf are very popular worldwide and are now being played semi professionally. The World Flying Disc Federation, Professional Disc Golf Association and the Freestyle Players Association are the official rules and sanctioning organizations for flying disc sports worldwide. Major League Ultimate (MLU) and the American Ultimate Disc League (AUDL) are the first semi professional ultimate leagues
Racing.
In motorsports, the Can-Am and Trans-Am series were both established in 1966. The Ford GT40 won outright in the 24 Hours of Le Mans.
Graham Hill edged out Jackie Stewart and Denny Hulme for the World Championship in Formula One.
People.
World leaders.
"(alphabetically by country)"
Activists.
Some Activist leaders of the 1960s period include:
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1960 • 1961 • 1962 • 1963 • 1964 • 1965 • 1966 • 1967 • 1968 • 1969

</doc>
<doc id="34548" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34548" title="2000">
2000

2000 ()
will be .
2000 was designated as:
The year 2000 was the first year of the 2000s decade. Popular culture holds the year 2000 as the first year of the 21st century and the 3rd millennium, due to a tendency to group the years according to decimal values, as if year zero were counted. According to the Gregorian Calendar these distinctions fall to the year 2001, because the 1st century was retroactively said to start with year AD 1. Since the calendar has no year zero, its first millennium spans from years 1 to 1000, inclusively, and its second millennium from years 1001 to 2000. (See more at "Millennium".)
The "year 2000" is sometimes abbreviated as "Y2K" (the "Y" stands for "year", and the "K" stands for "kilo" which means "thousand"). The year 2000 was the subject of Y2K concerns: fears that computers would not shift from 1999 to 2000 correctly. However, by the end of 1999, many companies had already converted to new, or upgraded their existing software. Some even obtained "Y2K certification". As a result of massive effort, relatively few problems occurred.

</doc>
<doc id="34549" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34549" title="1977">
1977

1977 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34550" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34550" title="1964">
1964

1964 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34551" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34551" title="2001">
2001

2001 ()
will be .
2001 was designated as:

</doc>
<doc id="34553" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34553" title="1999">
1999

1999 ()
will be .
1999 was designated as:

</doc>
<doc id="34555" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34555" title="1970s">
1970s

The 1970s, pronounced "the Nineteen Seventies", refers to a decade within the Gregorian calendar that began on January 1, 1970, and ended on December 31, 1979.
In the 21st century historians have increasingly portrayed the decade as a "pivot of change" in world history focusing especially on the economic upheavals. In the Western world, social progressive values that began in the 1960s, such as increasing political awareness and political and economic liberty of women, continued to grow. 
In the United Kingdom the 1979 elections resulted in the victory of its Conservative Party under Margaret Thatcher, the first and to date only female British Prime Minister. Industrialized countries, except Japan, experienced an economic recession due to an oil crisis caused by oil embargoes by the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries. The crisis saw the first instance of stagflation which began a political and economic trend of the replacement of Keynesian economic theory with neoliberal economic theory, with the first neoliberal governments being created in Chile, where a military coup led by Augusto Pinochet took place in 1973.
Novelist Tom Wolfe coined the term "'Me' decade" in his essay "The 'Me' Decade and the Third Great Awakening", published by "New York" magazine in August 1976 referring to the 1970s. The term describes a general new attitude of Americans towards atomized individualism and away from communitarianism in clear contrast with the 1960s.
In Asia, affairs regarding the People's Republic of China changed significantly following the recognition of the PRC by the United Nations, the death of Mao Zedong and the beginning of market liberalization by Mao's successors. Despite facing an oil crisis due to the OPEC embargo, the economy of Japan witnessed a large boom in this period, overtaking the economy of West Germany to become the second-largest in the world. The United States withdrew its military forces from their previous involvement in the Vietnam War which had grown enormously unpopular. In 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan which led to an ongoing war for ten years.
The 1970s saw an initial increase in violence in the Middle East as Egypt and Syria declared war on Israel, but in the late 1970s, the situation in the Middle East was fundamentally altered when Egypt signed the Egyptian–Israeli Peace Treaty. Anwar El Sadat, President of Egypt, was instrumental in the event and consequently became extremely unpopular in the Arab World and the wider Muslim world. He was assassinated in 1981. Political tensions in Iran exploded with the Iranian Revolution in 1979 which overthrew the Pahlavi dynasty and established an Islamic republic of Iran under the leadership of the Ayatollah Khomeini.
Africa saw further decolonization in the decade, with Angola and Mozambique gaining their independence in 1975 from the Portuguese Empire after the restoration of democracy in Portugal. The continent was however plagued by endemic military coups, with the long-reigning Emperor of Ethiopia Haile Selassie being removed, civil wars and famine.
The economies of much of the developing world continued to make steady progress in the early 1970s, because of the Green Revolution. They might have thrived and become stable in the way that Europe recovered after World War II through the Marshall Plan; however, their economic growth was slowed by the oil crisis but boomed immediately after.
Politics and wars.
Wars.
The most notable wars and/or other conflicts of the decade include:
International conflicts.
The most notable International conflicts of the decade include:
Coups.
The most prominent coups d'état of the decade include:
Terrorist attacks.
The most notable terrorist attacks of the decade include:
Prominent political events.
Worldwide
Americas
Europe
Asia
Africa
Worldwide trends.
Developing nations that were rich in oil experienced economic growth; others, not so endowed, saw the economic strain of oil price hikes lead to economic decline, particularly in Africa where a number of moderately democratic states became dictatorial regimes. Many Middle Eastern democracies turned into regimes with pseudo-democratic governments. Several Asian countries also saw the rise of dictators, including Indonesia, Philippines, and South Korea.
People were deeply influenced by the rapid pace of societal change and the aspiration for a more egalitarian society in cultures that were long colonized and have an even longer history of hierarchical social structure.
The Green Revolution of the late 1960s brought about self-sufficiency in food in many developing economies. At the same time an increasing number of people began to seek urban prosperity over agrarian life. This consequently saw the duality of transition of diverse interaction across social communities amid increasing information blockade across social class.
Other common global ethos of the 1970s world included increasingly flexible and varied gender roles for women in industrialized societies. More women could enter the work force. However, the gender role of men remained as that of a breadwinner. The period also saw the socioeconomic effect of an ever-increasing number of women entering the non-agrarian economic workforce. The Iranian revolution also affected global attitudes to and among those of the Muslim faith toward the end of the 1970s.
The global experience of the cultural transition of the 1970s and an experience of a global zeitgeist revealed the interdependence of economies since World War II, in a world increasingly polarized between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Economy.
The 1970s were perhaps the worst decade of most industrialized countries' economic performance since the Great Depression. Although there was no severe economic depression as witnessed in the 1930s, economic growth rates were considerably lower than previous decades. As a result, the 1970s adversely distinguished itself from the prosperous postwar period between 1945 and 1973. The oil shocks of 1973 and 1979 added to the existing ailments and conjured high inflation throughout much of the world for the rest of the decade. U.S. manufacturing industries began to decline as a result, with the United States running its last trade surplus (as of 2009[ [update]]) in 1975. In contrast, Japan's economy continued to expand and prosper during the decade, boosted by growing exports.
The average annual inflation rate from 1900 to 1970 was approximately 2.5%. From 1970-1979, however, the average rate was 7.06%, and topped out at 13.29% in December 1979. This period is also known for "stagflation", a phenomenon in which inflation and unemployment steadily increased. It led to double-digit interest rates that rose to unprecedented levels (above 12% per year). The prime rate hit 21.5 in December 1980, the highest in history. By the time of 1980, when U.S. President Jimmy Carter was running for re-election against Ronald Reagan, the misery index (the sum of the unemployment rate and the inflation rate) had reached an all-time high of 21.98%. The economic problems of the 1970s would result in a sluggish cynicism replacing the optimistic attitudes of the 1950s and 1960s. Faith in government was at an all-time low in the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate, as exemplified by the low voter turnout in the 1976 United States presidential election.
In Eastern Europe, Soviet-style command economies began showing signs of stagnation, in which successes were persistently dogged by setbacks. The oil shock increased East European, particularly Soviet, exports, but a growing inability to increase agricultural output caused growing concern to the governments of the COMECON block, and a growing dependence on food imported from democratic nations.
On the other hand, export-driven economic development in Asia, especially by the Four Asian Tigers (Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan), resulted in rapid economic transformation and industrialization. Their abundance of cheap labor, combined with educational and other policy reforms, set the foundation for development in the region during the 1970s and beyond.
Oil crisis.
Economically, the 1970s were marked by the energy crisis which peaked in 1973 and 1979 (see 1973 oil crisis and 1979 oil crisis). After the first oil shock in 1973, gasoline was rationed in many countries. Europe particularly depended on the Middle East for oil; the United States was also affected even though it had its own oil reserves. Many European countries introduced car-free days and weekends. In the United States, customers with a license plate ending in an odd number were only allowed to buy gasoline on odd-numbered days, while even-numbered plate-holders could only purchase gasoline on even-numbered days. The realization that oil reserves were not endless and technological development was not sustainable without potentially harming the environment ended the belief in limitless progress that had existed since the 19th century. As a result, ecological awareness rose substantially, which had a major effect on the economy.
Science and technology.
Science.
The 1970s witnessed an explosion in the understanding of solid-state physics, driven by the development of the integrated circuit, and the laser. Stephen Hawking developed his theories of black holes and the boundary-condition of the universe at this period with his theory called Hawking radiation. The biological sciences greatly advanced, with molecular biology, bacteriology, virology, and genetics achieving their modern forms in this decade. Biodiversity became a cause of major concern as habitat destruction, and Stephen Jay Gould's theory of punctuated equilibrium revolutionized evolutionary thought.
Space exploration.
As the 1960s ended, the United States had made two successful manned lunar landings. Many Americans lost interest afterward, feeling that since the country had accomplished President John F. Kennedy's goal of landing on the moon by the end of the 1960s, there was no need for further missions. There was also a growing sentiment that the billions of dollars spent on the space program should be put to other uses. The moon landings continued through 1972, but the near loss of the Apollo 13 astronauts in April 1970 served to further anti-NASA feelings. Plans for missions up to Apollo 20 were canceled, and the remaining Apollo and Saturn hardware was used for the Skylab space station program in 1973–1974, and for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), which was carried out in July 1975. Many of the ambitious projects NASA had planned for the 1970s were canceled amid heavy budget cutbacks, and instead it would devote most of the decade to the development of the space shuttle. ASTP was the last manned American space flight for the next five years. The year 1979 witnessed the spectacular reentry of Skylab over Australia. NASA had planned for a shuttle mission to the space station, but the shuttles were not ready to fly until 1981, too late to save it.
Meanwhile, the Soviets, having failed completely in their attempt at manned lunar landings, canceled the program in 1972. By then, however, they had already begun Salyut, the world's first space station program, which began in 1971. This would have problems of its own, especially the tragic loss of the Soyuz 11 crew in July 1971 and the near-loss of the Soyuz 18a crew during launch in April 1975. It eventually proved a success, with missions as long as six months being conducted by the end of the decade.
In terms of unmanned missions, a variety of lunar and planetary probes were launched by the US and Soviet programs during the decade. The most successful of these include the Soviet Lunokhod program, a series of robotic lunar missions which included the first unmanned sample return from another world, and the American Voyagers, which took advantage of a rare alignment of the outer planets to visit all of them except Pluto by the end of the 1980s.
China entered the space race in 1970 with the launching of its first satellite, but technological backwardness and limited funds would prevent the country from becoming a significant force in space exploration. Japan launched a satellite for the first time in 1972. The European Space Agency was founded during the decade as well.
Social science.
Social science intersected with hard science in the works in natural language processing by Terry Winograd (1973) and the establishment of the first cognitive sciences department in the world at MIT in 1979. The fields of generative linguistics and cognitive psychology went through a renewed vigor with symbolic modeling of semantic knowledge while the final devastation of the long-standing tradition of behaviorism came about through the severe criticism of B. F. Skinner's work in 1971 by the cognitive scientist Noam Chomsky.
Technology.
Electronics and communications.
The birth of modern computing was in the 1970s, which saw the development of:
The 1970s were also the start of:
Automobiles.
The 1970s was an era of fuel price increases, rising insurance rates, safety concerns, and emissions controls. The 1973 oil crisis caused a move towards smaller, fuel-efficient vehicles. Attempts were made to produce electric cars, but they were largely unsuccessful. In the United States, imported cars became a significant factor for the first time, and several domestic-built subcompact models entered the market. American-made cars such as the "quirky" AMC Gremlin, the jelly bean shaped AMC Pacer, and Pontiac Firebird's powerful Trans Am "sum up" the decade. Muscle cars and convertible models faded from favor during the early-1970s. It was believed that the 1976 Cadillac Eldorado would be the last American-built convertible; ending the open body style that once dominated the auto industry.
Cars in the U.S. from the early 1970s are noted more for their power than their styling, but they even lost their power by the late-1970s. Styling on American cars became progressively more boxy and rectilinear during the 1970s, with coupes being the most popular body style. Wood paneling and shag carpets dominated the interiors. Many automobiles began to lose their character and looked the same across brands and automakers, as well as featuring "luxury" enhancements such as vinyl roofs and opera windows. Only a few had "real personalities" such as the AMC Gremlin, which was America's first modern subcompact, and the AMC Pacer. "These two cars embody a sense of artful desperation that made them stand out from the crowd and epitomize at once the best and worst of the seventies."
Automobiles in the U.S. reached the largest sizes they would ever attain, but by 1977, General Motors managed to downsize its full-size models to more manageable dimensions. Ford followed suit two years later, with Chrysler offering new small front-wheel-drive models, but was suffering from a worsening financial situation caused by various factors. By 1979, the company was near bankruptcy, and under its new president Lee Iacocca (who had been fired from Ford the year before), asked for a government bailout. American Motors beat out the U.S. Big Three to subcompact sized model (the Gremlin) in 1970, but its fortunes declined throughout the decade, forcing it into a partnership with the French automaker Renault in 1979.
European car design underwent major changes during the 1970s due to the need for performance with high fuel efficiency – designs such as the Volkswagen Golf and Passat, BMW 3, 5, and 7 series, and Mercedes-Benz S-Class appeared at the latter half of the decade. Ford Europe, specifically Ford Germany, also eclipsed the profits of its American parent company. The designs of Giorgetto Giugiaro became dominant, along with those of Marcello Gandini in Italy. The 1970s also saw the decline and practical failure of the British car industry – a combination of militant strikes and poor quality control effectively halted development at British Leyland, owner of all other British car companies during the 1970s.
The Japanese automobile industry flourished during the 1970s, compared to other major auto markets. Japanese vehicles became internationally renowned for their affordability, reliability, and fuel-efficiency, which was very important to many customers due to the oil embargo. Japanese car manufacturing focused on computerized robotic manufacturing techniques and lean manufacturing, contributing to high-efficiency and low production costs. The Honda Civic was introduced in 1973, and sold well due to its high fuel-efficiency. Other popular compact cars included the Toyota Corolla and the Datsun Sunny, in addition to other cars from those companies and others such as Subaru, Mitsubishi, and Mazda.
Society.
Role of women in society.
The role of women in society was profoundly altered with growing feminism across the world and with the presence and rise of a significant number of women as heads of state outside monarchies and heads of government in a number of countries across the world during the 1970s, many being the first women to hold such positions. Non-monarch women heads of state and heads of government in this period included Isabel Martínez de Perón as the first woman President in Argentina and the first woman non-monarch head of state in the Western hemisphere in 1974 until being deposed in 1976, Elisabeth Domitien becomes the first woman Prime Minister of the Central African Republic, Indira Gandhi continuing as Prime Minister of India until 1977 (and taking office again in 1980), Prime Minister Golda Meir of Israel and acting Chairman Soong Ching-ling of the People's Republic of China continuing their leadership from the sixties, Lidia Gueiler Tejada becoming the interim President of Bolivia beginning from 1979 to 1980, Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo becoming the first woman Prime Minister of Portugal in 1979, and Margaret Thatcher becoming the first woman Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1979. Both Indira Gandhi and Margaret Thatcher would remain important political figures in the following decade in the 1980s.
Social movements.
Anti-war protests.
The opposition to the War in Vietnam that began in the 1960s grew exponentially during the early 1970s. One of the best-known anti-war demonstrations was the Kent State shootings. In 1970 university students were protesting the war and the draft. Riots ensued during the weekend and the National Guard was called in to maintain the peace. However, by 4 May 1970, tensions arose again, and as the crowd grew larger, the National Guard started shooting. Four students were killed and nine injured. This event caused disbelief and shock throughout the country and became a staple of anti-Vietnam demonstrations.
Environmentalism.
The 1970s started a mainstream affirmation of the environmental issues early activists from the 1960s, such as Rachel Carson and Murray Bookchin had warned of. The moon landing that had occurred at the end of the previous decade transmitted back concrete images of the Earth as an integrated, life-supporting system and shaped a public willingness to preserve nature. On April 22, 1970, the United States celebrated its first Earth Day in which over two thousand colleges and universities and roughly ten thousand primary and secondary schools participated.
Feminism.
The Feminist Movement in the United States which began in the 1960s carried over to the 1970s, and took a prominent role within society. The fiftieth anniversary of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution (which legalized female suffrage) in 1970 was commemorated by the Women's Strike for Equality and other protests.
With the anthology "Sisterhood is Powerful" and other works, such as "Sexual Politics", being published at the start of the decade, feminism started to reach a larger audience than ever before. In addition, the Supreme Court's 1973 decision of "Roe v. Wade" that constitutionalized the right to an abortion brought the women's rights movement into the national political spotlight.
Gloria Steinem, Betty Friedan, Betty Ford, Shirley Chisholm, Bella Abzug, Robin Morgan, Kate Millet, Elizabeth Holtzman, amongst many others, led the movement for women's equality.
Even musically, the women's movement had its shining moment. Australian-American singer Helen Reddy, recorded the song "I Am Woman", which became an anthem for the women's liberation movement. "I Am Woman" reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and even won Helen her one and only Grammy Award.
Most efforts of the movement, especially aims at social equality and repeal of the remaining oppressive, sexist laws, were successful. Doors of opportunity were more numerous and much further open than before as women gained unheard of success in business, politics, education, science, the law, and even the home. Though most aims of the movement were successful, however, there were some significant failures, most notably the failure to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution with only three more states needed to ratify it (efforts to ratify ERA in the unratified states continues to this day and twenty-two states have adopted state ERAs). Also, the wage gap failed to close, but it did become smaller.
The original feminist movement largely ended in 1982 with the failure of the Equal Rights Amendment, and with new conservative leadership in Washington, D.C.. American women created a brief, but powerful, third-wave in the early 1990s which addressed sexual harassment (inspired by the Anita Hill–Clarence Thomas Senate Judiciary Committee hearings of 1991). The results of the movement included a new awareness of such issues amongst women, and unprecedented numbers of women elected to public office, particularly the United States Senate.
Civil rights.
The Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s began to fracture in the 1970s, as social groups began defining themselves more by their differences than by their universalities. The Black Nationalist movement grew out of frustrations with the "non-violent" strategies of earlier Civil Rights Activists. With the assassinations of both Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Senator Bobby Kennedy, many blacks were compelled to reject ideas of negotiation and instead embrace isolation. The feminist movement also splintered from a larger push for Civil Rights in the 1970s. The seventies were seen as the "woman's turn", though many feminists incorporated civil rights ideals into their movement. A courageous feminist who had inherited the leadership position of the civil rights movement from her husband, Coretta Scott King, as leader of the black movement, called for an end to all discrimination, helping and encouraging the Woman's Liberation movement, and other movements as well. At the National Women's Conference in 1977 a minority women's resolution, promoted by King and others, passed to ensure racial equality in the movement's goals, after which, in one of the most emotional moments of the Conference, women of all races joined hands and sung "We Shall Overcome". Similarly, the gay movement made a huge step forward in the 1970s with the election of political figures such as Harvey Milk to public office and the advocating of anti-gay discrimination legislation passed and not passed during the decade. Many celebrities, including Freddie Mercury and Andy Warhol, also "came out" during this decade, bringing gay culture further into the limelight.
Youth suffrage.
The Twenty-sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution was ratified on July 1, 1971, lowering the voting age for all federal and state elections from 21 years to 18 years. The primary impetus for this change was the fact that young men were being drafted to fight in the Vietnam War before they were old enough to vote.
Popular culture.
Music.
The early 1970s saw the rise of many diverse forms of popular and rock musical styles, including jazz rock (aka "fusion"), southern rock, folk rock, and soft rock, with the latter including recording artists such as The Carpenters, Carole King, and James Taylor. It also included the rise of such popular, influential rhythm and blues (R&B) and Motown artists as Stevie Wonder, The Temptations, and The Jackson 5.
Funk, an offshoot of Soul music with a greater emphasis on beats, influences from rhythm and blues, jazz, and psychedelic rock, was also very popular. The mid-1970s also saw the rise of disco music, which dominated during the last half of the decade with bands like the Bee Gees, ABBA, Village People, Boney M, Donna Summer, KC and the Sunshine Band, etc. In response to this, rock music became increasingly hard-edged with British early metal artists like Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath, and Deep Purple. Minimalism also emerged, led by composers such as Philip Glass, Steve Reich and Michael Nyman. This was a break from the intellectual serial music of the tradition of Schoenberg which lasted from the early 1900s to 1960s.
Experimental classical music influenced both art rock and progressive rock genres with bands such as Yes, Pink Floyd, Supertramp, Rush, Genesis, King Crimson, Emerson, Lake & Palmer, Jethro Tull, The Moody Blues and Soft Machine. Hard rock and Heavy metal also emerged among British bands Led Zeppelin, Queen, The Who, Black Sabbath, UFO, Deep Purple, Uriah Heep, and Judas Priest.
Australian band AC/DC also found its hard rock origins in the early 1970s and its breakthrough in 1979's "Highway to Hell", while popular American rock bands included Aerosmith, Lynyrd Skynyrd and "shocksters" metalists Alice Cooper, Blue Öyster Cult, and Kiss, and guitar-oriented Ted Nugent and Van Halen. In Europe, there was a surge of popularity in the early decade for glam rock. The mid-'70s saw the rise of punk rock from its protopunk/garage band roots in the 1960s and early 1970s. Major acts include the Ramones, Blondie, Patti Smith, the Sex Pistols, and The Clash, while seminal band The Runaways would produce 1980s solo recording artists Joan Jett and Lita Ford. The highest-selling album was Pink Floyd's "The Dark Side of the Moon" (1973). It remained on the "Billboard" 200 albums chart for 741 weeks. Electronic instrumental prog rock was particularly significant in continental Europe, allowing bands like Kraftwerk, Tangerine Dream, Can, and Faust to circumvent the language barrier. Their synthesiser-heavy "Kraut rock", along with the work of Brian Eno (for a time the keyboard player with Roxy Music), would be a major influence on subsequent synth rock. The mid-1970s, saw the rise of electronic art music musicians such as Jean Michel Jarre, Vangelis, and Tomita, who with Brian Eno were a significant influence of the development of new-age music. Japanese band Yellow Magic Orchestra helped to pioneer synthpop, with their self-titled album (in 1978) setting a template with less minimalism and with a strong emphasis on melody, and drawing from a wider range of influences than had been employed by Kraftwerk.YMO also introduced the microprocessor-based Roland MC-8 sequencer and TR-808 rhythm machine to popular music.
In the first half of the 1970s many jazz musicians from the Miles Davis school achieve cross-over success through jazz-rock fusion with bands like Weather Report, Return to Forever, The Headhunters and The Mahavishnu Orchestra who also influence this genre and many others. In Germany, Manfred Eicher started the ECM label, which quickly made a name for "chamber jazz". Towards the end of the decade, Jamaican Reggae music, already popular in the Caribbean and Africa since the early 1970s, became very popular in the U.S. and in Europe, mostly because of reggae superstar and legend Bob Marley. The mid 1970s saw the reemergence of acoustic jazz with the return of artists like Dexter Gordon to the U.S. music scene, who, along with a number of other artists, such as trumpet innovator Woody Shaw, were among the last of the decade's traditionally-oriented acoustic jazz musicians to be signed to major record labels, to receive critical and widespread commercial recognition and multiple Grammy nominations.
The late '70s also saw the beginning of Hip Hop music with disc jockeys like DJ Kool Herc and Afrika Bambaataa taking loops from funk and soul records and play it repeatedly at block parties and dance clubs. In the end of the 1970s popular songs like "Rapper's Delight" by Sugarhill Gang gave Hip Hop a wider audience. Hip Hop was also influenced by the song "The Revolution Will Not Be Televised" by Gil Scott Heron. Country music remained very popular in the United States. Between 1977 and 1979, it became more mainstream, as Kenny Rogers, Dolly Parton, Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson and Allman Brothers Band all scored hits which reached both country and pop charts.
MUSICIANS LOST: A major event in music in the early 70s was the deaths of popular rock stars Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, and Jim Morrison, all at the age of 27. Two of popular music's most successful artists from other eras died within eight weeks of each other in 1977. Elvis Presley, the best-selling singer of all time, died on August 16, 1977. Presley's funeral was held at Graceland, on Thursday, August 18, 1977. Bing Crosby, who sold about 50 million records, died October 14, 1977. His single, White Christmas, remains as the best selling single of all time, confirmed by the Guinness Records.
Statistically, Led Zeppelin was the most successful musical act of the 1970s, having sold more than 300 million records since 1969.
Film.
Oscar winners of the decade were "Patton" (1970), "The French Connection" (1971), "The Godfather" (1972), "The Sting" (1973), "The Godfather Part II" (1974), "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" (1975), "Rocky" (1976), "Annie Hall" (1977), "The Deer Hunter" (1978), and "Kramer vs. Kramer" (1979).
The top ten highest-grossing films of the decade are (in order from highest to lowest grossing): "", "Jaws", "Grease", "The Exorcist", "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", "Superman", "The Godfather", "Saturday Night Fever", "Rocky", and "Jaws 2".
Two of these movies came out on the same day, June 16, 1978.
In 1970s European cinema, the failure of the Prague Spring brought about nostalgic motion pictures such as István Szabó's "Szerelmesfilm" (1970). German New Wave and Rainer Fassbinder's existential movies characterized film-making in Germany. The movies of the Swedish director Ingmar Bergman reached a new level of expression in motion pictures like "Cries and Whispers" (1973).
Asian cinema of the 1970s catered to the rising middle class fantasies and struggles. In the Bollywood cinema of India, this was epitomized by the movies of Bollywood superhero Amitabh Bachchan. Another Asian touchstone beginning in the early 1970s was Hong Kong martial arts film which sparked a greater interest in Chinese martial arts around the world. Martial arts film reached the peak of its popularity largely in part due to its greatest icon, Bruce Lee.
During the 1970s, Hollywood continued the New Hollywood revolution of the late-1960s with young film-makers. Top-grossing "Jaws" (1975) ushered in the blockbuster era of filmmaking, though it was eclipsed two years later by the science-fiction film "" (1977). "Saturday Night Fever" (1977) single-handedly touched off disco mania in the U.S. "The Godfather" (1972) was also one of the decade's greatest successes and its first follow-up, "The Godfather Part II" (1974) was also successful for a sequel.
"The Rocky Horror Picture Show" flopped in its 1975 debut, only to reappear as a more-popular midnight show later in the decade. Still in limited release 36 years after its premiere, it is the longest-running theatrical release in film history.
"The Exorcist" (1973) was a box office success for the horror genre, inspiring many other so-called "devil (Satan)" films like "The Omen" and both of their own sequels.
"All That Jazz" (1979) closes out the 1970s. It won four Oscars and several other awards. In 2001 the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.
Television.
United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom, colour channels were now available; three stations had begun broadcasting in colour between 1967 and 1969. However, many viewers continued to watch black-and-white television sets for most of the decade, which meant for example that televised snooker (in which the colour of balls is important) did not reach the heights of its popularity until the 1980s.
Notable dramas included "Play for Today" and "Pennies from Heaven". In police dramas, there was a move towards increasing realism; popular shows included "Dixon of Dock Green", "Z-Cars", "Softly, Softly", and "The Sweeney".
The science fiction show "Doctor Who" reached its peak.
1970s UK television featured a mix of traditional and more modern comedy. "Morecambe and Wise", "The Benny Hill Show", "Are You Being Served?" and "Dad's Army" had their origins in the variety show and radio comedy of the first half of the century. Many popular British situation comedies (sit-coms) were gentle, unchallenging comedies of middle-class life; typical examples were "Terry and June" and "Sykes". However, the middle-class settings of "The Good Life" and "The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin" contrasted with their anti-establishment theme of people rejecting traditional social norms. A harsher side of society was shown by comedy series like "Porridge" and "Rising Damp", while sitcoms such as "Mind Your Language", "Love Thy Neighbour" and "Till Death Us Do Part" reflected social unease brought about by post-war immigration. Spike Milligan's "Q" and the still-popular "Monty Python's Flying Circus" both used surreal comedy, originating from the 1950s "The Goon Show".
The television information retrieval service Teletext was initially introduced when the BBC Ceefax system went live on 23 September 1974.
BBC2 became the first computer generated ident in the world.
United States.
In the United States, long-standing trends were declining. "The Red Skelton Show" and "The Ed Sullivan Show", long-revered American institutions, were canceled. The innocent, 1950s-style family sitcom saw its last breath at the start of the new decade with "The Brady Bunch" and "The Partridge Family".
To reflect the new social trends, television changed dramatically with more urban and edgy settings, and replaced the popular rural/country wholesome look of the previous decade. This particular trend was known as the rural purge. Television was transformed by what became termed as "social consciousness" programming, such as "All in the Family" and "Soap", which broke down television barriers.
The women's movement ushered in a slew of programming featuring strong, independent females as central characters. Most notable was "The Mary Tyler Moore Show", which spawned the successful spin-offs "Rhoda" and "Phyllis", and also resulted in Mary Tyler Moore becoming the first female to head a television production company of her own, MTM Enterprises, which churned out groundbreaking programming in the late 1970s throughout the 1990s. Women were also established portraying strong characters in programs like "Police Woman", "Wonder Woman", "The Bionic Woman", and others.
Minority-centric television programming also featured prominently during the 1970s. Shows featuring minorities as main characters, such as "Sanford and Son", "Maude" and "Good Times", broke down barriers and became very popular. In addition, "Soul Train", the brainchild of Don Cornelius, premiered in 1971 as an alternative to "American Bandstand", giving a forum for soul, funk, jazz, R&B, disco, and future rap and hip hop artists to gain exposure to American audiences, consumers, music lovers, enthusiasts, and those keen on learning new dance moves.
The television western, which had been very popular in the 1950s and 1960s, all but died out during the 1970s, with "Bonanza", "The Virginian", and "Gunsmoke" ending their runs. Replacing westerns were police and detective shows, a trend that would last through the 1980s.
Television still had its medical shows of the 1970s, however, "Emergency!" was the first popular medical drama ever to feature both the paramedic program as well as the hospital emergency department, which also encouraged future people in the United States to develop their own paramedic program or hospital emergency department, and acted as an inspiration for many individuals.
By the mid-to-late 1970s, "jiggle television"—programs oriented toward sexual gratification and bawdy humor and situations such as "Charlie's Angels", "The Love Boat", and "Three's Company"—became popular.
Soap operas expanded their audiences beyond housewives with the rise of "All My Children", "As the World Turns", "Somerset", and "The Young and the Restless".
Game shows such as "Match Game", "The Hollywood Squares", and "Family Feud", were also popular daytime television. The height of "Match Game"‍ '​s popularity occurred between 1973 and 1977, before it was overtaken by "Family Feud" in 1978. Television's current longest-running game show, "The Price is Right", began its run hosted by Bob Barker in 1972.
Another influential genre was the television newscast, which built on its initial widespread success in the 1960s.
The science fiction phenomenon of the late 1970s that began with "Star Wars" went to television with shows such as "Battlestar Galactica".
Finally, the variety show received its last hurrah during this decade, with shows such as "Sonny and Cher Comedy Hour" and "Donny & Marie". "The Carol Burnett Show" also ended its historic 11-year run in 1978.
Pay television.
As cable television became more affordable and accessible by U.S. consumers, the race to bring the silver screen to the small screen commenced with the launch of pay television services showing premium content.
HBO launched on November 8, 1972, becoming the nation's first pay-television channel. On September 30, 1975, HBO became the first television network to continuously deliver signals via satellite when it showed the "Thrilla in Manila" boxing-match between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier.
Star Channel launched their service offerings nationally in 1973 through the delivery of movies on video tapes for cable providers to broadcast. This proved problematic since the videotapes were often riddled with technical difficulties. Star Channel eventually was linked up to satellite in January 1978. Shortly after, Warner Communications acquired the channel and relaunched it on December 1, 1979, in its current form as The Movie Channel.
Media giant Viacom launched their premium service, Showtime, nationally on July 1, 1976, after a brief, wildly successful test launch on their cable system in Dublin, California.
Australia.
In 1974, Australian TV tests color transmissions (full-time color comes in 1975).
South Africa.
South Africa saw nationwide television service for the first time on January 5, 1976, although limited-view, locally available television began on May 5, 1975.
Sports.
The 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Germany saw swimmer Mark Spitz set seven World Records and won a record seven gold medals. The 1976 Summer Olympics were held in Montreal, Canada. Brazil won the 1970 FIFA World Cup in Mexico, West Germany won the 1974 FIFA World Cup in West Germany, and Argentina won the 1978 FIFA World Cup in Argentina. The 1970 FIFA World Cup was the first world cup to be televised in color.
The Oakland Athletics three-peated at the World Series in 1972-1974.
The Cincinnati Reds go to the World Series in 1970, 1972, 1975, and 1976, led by the Big Red Machine winning two out of four.
The New York Yankees won the World Series in 1977 and 1978 after losing in 1976.
The Dallas Cowboys and the Pittsburgh Steelers dominated the decade in the NFL. Steelers were led by Terry Bradshaw and Chuck Noll, and the Cowboys were led by Roger Staubach and Tom Landry.
The Philadelphia Flyers won the Stanley Cup in 1974 and 1975.
On April 9, 1975, Asia's first professional basketball league, the Philippine Basketball Association (PBA) were played first game at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines.
Disc sports (Frisbee).
As numbers of young people became alienated from social norms, they resisted and looked for alternatives. They would form what would become known as the counterculture. The forms of escape and resistance would manifest in many ways including social activism, alternative lifestyles, experimental living through foods, dress, music and alternative recreational activities, including that of throwing a Frisbee. What started with a few players like Victor Malafronte, Z Weyand and Ken Westerfield experimenting with new ways of throwing and catching a Frisbee, later would become known as playing freestyle. Organized disc sports, in the 1970s, began with promotional efforts from Wham-O and Irwin Toy (Canada), a few tournaments and professionals using Frisbee show tours to perform at universities, fairs and sporting events. Disc sports such as freestyle, double disc court, guts, disc ultimate and disc golf became this sports first events.
Literature.
Fiction in the early '70s brought a return to old-fashioned storytelling, especially with Erich Segal's "Love Story". The seventies also saw the decline of previously well-respected writers, such as Saul Bellow and Peter De Vries, who both released poorly received novels at the start of the decade. Racism remained a key literary subject. John Updike emerged as a major literary figure. Reflections of the 1960s experience also found roots in the literature of the decade through the works of Joyce Carol Oates and Wright Morris. With the rising cost of hard-cover books and the increasing readership of "genre fiction", the paperback became a popular medium. Criminal non-fiction also became a popular topic. Irreverence and satire, typified in Kurt Vonnegut's "Breakfast of Champions", were common literary elements. The horror genre also emerged, and by the late 1970s Stephen King had become one of the most popular genre novelists.
In non-fiction, several books related to Nixon and the Watergate scandal topped the best-selling lists. 1977 brought many high-profile biographical works of literary figures, such as those of Virginia Woolf, Agatha Christie, and J. R. R. Tolkien.
Architecture.
Architecture in the 1970s began as a continuation of styles created by such architects as Frank Lloyd Wright and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. Early in the decade, several architects competed to build the tallest building in the world. Of these buildings, the most notable are the John Hancock Center and Sears Tower in Chicago, both designed by Bruce Graham and Fazlur Khan, and the World Trade Center towers in New York by American architect Minoru Yamasaki. The decade also brought experimentation in geometric design, pop-art, postmodernism, and early deconstructivism.
In 1974 Louis Kahn's last and arguably most famous building, the National Assembly Building of Dhaka, Bangladesh, was completed. The building's use of open spaces and groundbreaking geometry brought rare attention to the small south Asian country. Hugh Stubbins' Citicorp Center revolutionized the incorporation of solar panels in office buildings. The seventies brought further experimentation in glass and steel construction and geometric design. Chinese architect I. M. Pei's John Hancock Tower in Boston, Massachusetts is an example, although like many buildings of the time, the experimentation was flawed and glass panes fell from the façade. In 1976, the completed CN Tower in Toronto became the world's tallest free-standing structure on land, an honor it held until 2007. The fact that no taller tower had been built between the construction of the CN Tower and the Burj Khalifa shows how innovative the architecture and engineering of the structure truly was.
Modern architecture was increasingly criticized as the decade went on from the point of view of postmodern architects, such as Philip Johnson, Charles Moore, and Michael Graves, who advocated a return to pre-modern styles of architecture and the incorporation of pop elements as a means of communicating with a broader public. Other architects, such as Peter Eisenman of the New York Five, advocated the pursuit of form for the sake of form and drew on semiotics theory for support.
"High Tech" architecture moved forward as Buckminster Fuller continued his experiments in geodesic domes, while the Georges Pompidou Center, designed by Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers, which opened in 1977, was a prominent example. As the decade drew to a close, Frank Gehry broke out in new direction with his own house in Santa Monica, a highly complex structure, half excavated out of an existing bungalow and half cheaply built construction using materials such as chicken wire fencing.Terracotta Army figures, dating from 210 BC, were discovered in 1974 by some local farmers in Lintong District, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China, near the Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor (Chinese: 秦始皇陵; pinyin: Qín Shǐhuáng Ling). In 1978 electrical workers in Mexico City found the remains of the Great Pyramid of Tenochtitlan in the middle of the city.
Fashion.
Clothing styles during the 1970s were influenced by outfits seen in popular music groups and in Hollywood films. In clothing, prints, especially from India and other parts of the world, were fashionable.
Much of the 1970s fashion styles were influenced by the hippie movement.
Significant fashion trends of the 1970s include:
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1970 • 1971 • 1972 • 1973 • 1974 • 1975 • 1976 • 1977 • 1978 • 1979

</doc>
<doc id="34556" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34556" title="1990s">
1990s

The 1990s, pronounced "nineteen-nineties" or abbreviated as "nineties", was a decade that began on January 1, 1990, and ended on December 31, 1999.
Culturally, the 1990s was characterized by the rise of multiculturalism and alternative media, which continued into the 2000s. Movements such as grunge, the rave scene and hip hop spread around the world to young people during the decade, aided by then-new technology such as cable television and the World Wide Web.
A combination of factors, including the continued mass mobilization of capital markets through neoliberalism, the thawing of the decades-long Cold War, the beginning of the widespread proliferation of new media such as the Internet from the middle of the decade onwards, increasing skepticism towards government, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union led to a realignment and reconsolidation of economic and political power across the world and within countries. The dot-com bubble of 1997–2000 brought wealth to some entrepreneurs before its crash in 2000–2001.
New ethnic conflicts emerged in Africa, the Balkans and the Caucasus, the former two which led to the Rwandan genocide and Bosnian genocide, respectively. Signs of any resolution of tensions between Israel and the Arab world remained elusive despite the progress of the Oslo Accords, though the The Troubles in Northern Ireland came to a standstill in 1998 with the Good Friday Agreement after 30 years of violence.
Politics and wars.
Wars.
The most prominent armed conflicts of the decade include:
Prominent political events.
Africa
North America
Asia
Europe
South America
Assassinations.
The 1990s were marked by several notable assassinations and assassination attempts:
Economics.
North America
Asia
Europe
South America
Technology and science.
Technology.
The 1990s were a revolutionary decade for digital technology. Between 1990 and 1997, individual personal computer ownership in the US rose from 15% to 35%. Cell phones of the early 1990s and earlier were very large, lacked extra features, and were used by only a few percent of the population of even the wealthiest nations. Only a few million people used online services in 1990, and the World Wide Web had only just been invented. The first web browser went online in 1993 and by 2001, more than 50% of some Western countries had Internet access, and more than 25% had cell phone access.
Automobiles.
The 1990s began with another recession that dampened car sales. General Motors continued to suffer huge losses thanks to an inefficient structure, stale designs, and poor quality. Sales improved with the economy by the mid-'90s, but GM's US market share gradually declined to less than 40% (from a peak of 50% in the '70s). While the new Saturn division fared well, Oldsmobile declined sharply, and attempts to remake the division as a European-style luxury car were unsuccessful.
Cars in the 1990s had a rounder, more streamlined shape than those of the 1970s and 1980s; this style would continue early into the 2000s and to a lesser extent later on.
Chrysler ran into financial troubles again as the '90s started. Like GM, it too had a stale model lineup (except for the best-selling minivans) that was largely based on the aging K-car platform. In 1992, chairman Lee Iacocca retired, and the company began a remarkable revival, introducing the new LH platform and "Cab-Forward" styling, along with a highly successful redesign of the full-sized Dodge Ram in 1994. Chrysler's minivans continued to dominate the market despite increasing competition. In 1998, Daimler-Benz (the parent company of Mercedes-Benz) merged with Chrysler. The following year, it was decided to retire Plymouth, which had been on a long decline since the '70s. Ford continued to fare well in the '90s, with the second and third generations of the Ford Taurus being named the best selling car in the United States from 1992 to 1996. However, the Taurus would be outsold and dethroned by the Toyota Camry starting in 1997, which became the best selling car in the United States for the rest of the decade and into the 2000s. Ford also introduced the Ford Explorer, 1991 being the first model year. Fords Explorer became the best selling SUV on the market; out selling both the Chevy Blazer and Jeep Cherokee
Japanese cars continued to be highly successful during the decade. The Honda Accord vied with the Taurus most years for being the best-selling car in the United States during the early part of the decade. Although launched in 1989, the luxury brands Lexus and Infiniti began car sales of 1990 model year vehicles and saw great success. Lexus would go on to outsell Mercedes-Benz and BMW in the United States by 1991, and would outsell Cadillac and Lincoln by the end of the decade. SUVs and trucks became hugely popular during the economic boom in the second half of the decade. Many makes that had never built a truck before started selling SUVs. Car styling during the 1990s became gradually more round and ovoid, the third-generation Taurus and Mercury Sable being some of the more extreme examples. Safety features such as airbags and shoulder belts became mandatory equipment on new cars.
Environment.
At the beginning of the decade, sustainable development and environmental protection became serious issues for governments and the international community. In 1987, the publication of the Brundtland Report by the United Nations had paved the way to establish an environmental governance. In 1992 the Earth Summit was held in Rio de Janeiro, in which several countries committed to protect the environment, signing a Convention on Biological Diversity.
The prevention of the destruction of the tropical rainforests of the world is a major environmental cause that first came into wide public concern in the early 1990s, and has continued and accelerated.
The Chernobyl disaster had significant impact on public opinion at the end of the 1980s, and the fallout was still causing cancer deaths well into the 1990s and possibly even into the 21st century. All along the 1990s, several environmental NGOs helped improve environmental awareness among public opinion and governments. The most famous of these organizations during this decade was Greenpeace, which did not hesitate to lead illegal actions in the name of environmental preservation. These organizations also drawn attention on the large deforestion of the Amazon Rainforest during the period.
Global warming as an aspect of climate change also became a major concern, and the creation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) after the Earth Summit helped coordinate efforts to reduce carbon emissions in the atmosphere. From 1995, the UNFCCC held annual summits on climate change, leading to the adoption of the Kyoto Protocol in December 1997, a binding agreement signed by several developed countries.
Society.
The 1990s represented continuing social liberalization in most countries, though coupled with an increase in the influence of capitalism, which would continue until the Great Recession of the late 2000s/early 2010s.
Youth culture in the 1990s responded to this by embracing "both" environmentalism and entrepreneurship. Western world fashions reflected this by often turning highly individualistic and/or counter-cultural, which was influenced by Generation X and Generation Y/Millennials: tattoos and body piercing gained popularity, and "retro" styles inspired by fashions of the 1960s and 1970s were also prevalent. Some young people became increasingly involved in extreme sports and outdoor activities that combined embracing athletics with the appreciation of nature. Those born in the 1990s are known to be a part of the Millennials generation, along with those born in the 1980s. The slacker and Valley Girl cultures were prevalent, and the decade was heavily influenced by Californian culture.
In 1990, the World Health Organization removed homosexuality from its list of diseases. Increasing acceptance of homosexuality occurred in the western world, slowly starting in the early 1990s.
Additional significant world-wide events.
Europe
North America
Canada
Asia
Popular culture.
Fashion.
Significant fashion trends of the 1990s include:
Film.
The 1990s were an eventful time for film.
Dogme 95 becomes an important European artistic motion picture movement by the end of the decade. The first full-length CGI movie, Pixar's "Toy Story", is released, revolutionizing animated films. "Titanic" becomes a cultural phenomenon throughout the world, and eventually becomes the highest grossing film of all time, grossing over $1.8 billion worldwide. It would hold this record for over a decade until 2010 when director James Cameron had another one of his films take the title, that being "Avatar".
The films produced by the Walt Disney Animation Studios became popular once more when the studio returned to making traditionally animated musical family classics such as "Beauty and the Beast", "Aladdin", and "The Lion King". This era was known as the Disney Renaissance.
Music.
The 1990s were a decade that saw marketing became more segmented, as MTV gradually shifted away from music videos beginning in 1992 and radio splintered into narrower formats aimed at different niches. However, they are perhaps best known for grunge, gangsta rap, R&B, teen pop; eurodance, electronic dance music, the renewed popularity of punk rock mainly because of the band Green Day (which would also help create a new genre pop punk) and for being the decade that alternative rock became mainstream. U2 was one of the most popular 1990s bands, their groundbreaking Zoo TV and PopMart tours were the top selling tours of 1992 and 1997. 
Glam metal dies out through its own accord in the music mainstream by 1991. Grunge becomes popular in 1991 because of the success of Nirvana's "Nevermind", Pearl Jam's "Ten" and Soundgarden's "Badmotorfinger". Pop punk also becomes popular with such artists as Green Day, Blink-182, Weezer, Social Distortion, The Offspring, Bad Religion, NOFX and Rancid. Other successful alternative acts included Red Hot Chili Peppers, Radiohead, Gin Blossoms, Oasis, Blur, Soul Asylum, Third Eye Blind, Stone Temple Pilots, Faith No More, The Smashing Pumpkins, Live, Everclear, Bush, Alice in Chains and Screaming Trees.
Dr. Dre's 1992 album "The Chronic" provided a template for modern gangsta rap. Due to the success of Death Row Records, West Coast gangsta rap commercially dominated hip hop during the early 1990s, along with The Notorious B.I.G. on the East Coast. Hip hop became the best selling music genre by the mid-1990s.
In the United Kingdom, the uniquely British alternative rock Britpop genre emerged as part of the more general Cool Britannia culture, with Blur, Oasis, The Verve, Supergrass, Pulp, Manic Street Preachers, Suede, Elastica, Ride and Shed Seven. The impact of boy band pop sensation Take That brings about a widespread scene of teen pop acts around the world such as Boyzone, Backstreet Boys, Hanson, N Sync, Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera who come to prominence into the new millennium. Female pop icons Spice Girls took the world by storm, becoming the most commercially successful British group since The Beatles, The Rolling Stones and Led Zeppelin. 1991 also saw the death of Queen frontman Freddie Mercury from AIDS-related pneumonia.
Contemporary R&B and quiet storm continue in popularity among adult audiences, which began during the 1980s. Popular American contemporary R&B artists included Michael Bolton, Kenny G, Celine Dion, Mariah Carey, D’Angelo, Lauryn Hill, Whitney Houston, Sade, En Vogue, TLC,Destiny's Child, Toni Braxton, Boyz II Men, Dru Hill, Gloria Estefan, Vanessa L. Williams and LeAnn Rimes.
The Tibetan Freedom Concert brings 120,000 people together in the interest of increased human rights and autonomy for Tibet from China. Freddie Mercury, Kurt Cobain, Selena, Tupac Shakur, and The Notorious B.I.G. are the most publicized music-related deaths of the decade, in 1991, 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997 respectively.
Richey Edwards of the Manic Street Preachers was publicized in the media in 1991 following an incident involving Steve Lamacq backstage after a live show, in which Edwards carved '4 Real' into his arm. Edwards disappeared in 1995, which was highly publicized. He is still missing.
Controversy surrounded The Prodigy with the release of the track "Smack My Bitch Up". The National Organization for Women (NOW) claimed that the track was "advocating violence against women" due to the lyrics of that song. The music video (directed by Jonas Åkerlund) featured a first-person POV of someone going clubbing, indulging in drugs and alcohol, getting into fist fights, abusing women and picking up a prostitute. At the end of the video the camera pans over to a mirror, revealing the subject to be a woman.
1994 became a breakthrough year for punk rock in California, with the success of bands like Bad Religion, Social Distortion, Blink-182, Green Day, The Offspring, Rancid, and similar groups following. This success would continue to grow in over the next two decades, 2000s and 2010s. The 1990s also became the most important decade for ska punk/reggae rock, with the success of many bands like Buck-O-Nine, Goldfinger, Less Than Jake, The Mighty Mighty Bosstones, Murphy’s Law, No Doubt, Reel Big Fish, Save Ferris, Sublime and Sugar Ray.
The rave movement that emerged in the late 1980s rises incredibly in the early to mid-1990s and continues to exist. Rave spawns genres such as Intelligent dance music and Drum and bass. The latter is an offshoot of jungle techno and breakbeat. Popular artists include Moby, Fatboy Slim, Björk, Aphex Twin, Orbital (band), The Orb, Chemical Brothers, Basement Jaxx, Todd Terry, 808 State, Primal Scream, The Shamen, The KLF and The Prodigy.
The rise of industrial music, somewhat a fusion of synthpop and heavy metal, rises to worldwide popularity with bands like Godflesh, Nine Inch Nails, Rammstein, Ministry and Marilyn Manson. Groove metal was born through the efforts of Pantera, whose seventh studio album "Far Beyond Driven" (1994) was notable for going number one on "Billboard" 200. Another heavy metal subgenre called nu metal, which mixed metal with hip hop influences, becomes popular with bands like Korn, Slipknot and Limp Bizkit selling millions of albums worldwide.
In the 1990s, country music became a worldwide phenomenon thanks to Billy Ray Cyrus, Shania Twain, and Garth Brooks. The latter enjoyed one of the most successful careers in popular music history, breaking records for both sales and concert attendance throughout the decade. The RIAA has certified his recordings at a combined (128× platinum), denoting roughly 113 million U.S. shipments. Other artists that experienced success during this time included Clint Black, Sammy Kershaw, Aaron Tippin, Travis Tritt, Suzy Bogguss, Alan Jackson, Lorrie Morgan and the newly formed duo of Brooks & Dunn; George Strait, whose career began in the 1980s, also continued to have widespread success in this decade and beyond. Female artists such as Reba McEntire, Faith Hill, Martina McBride, Deana Carter, LeAnn Rimes, and Mary Chapin Carpenter all released platinum selling albums in the 1990s. The Dixie Chicks became one of the most popular country bands in the 1990s and early 2000s. Their 1998 debut album "Wide Open Spaces" went on to become certified 12x platinum while their 1999 album "Fly" went on to become 10x platinum.
Television.
TV shows, mostly sitcoms, were popular with the American audience. Series such as "Roseanne" and "Seinfeld", both which premiered in the late eighties, and "Frasier", a spin-off of the 1980s hit "Cheers" were viewed throughout the 1990s. These sitcoms, along with "Friends", "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air", "Full House", "Family Matters", "That '70s Show", "Married... with Children", "Everybody Loves Raymond", and "Martin", turned TV in new directions and defined the humor of the decade.
In early 1993, one of the last westerns ever to air on television was "Walker, Texas Ranger", a crime drama which also starred Chuck Norris as the title character. Lasting for 9 seasons, the show tackled a wide variety of subjects, and was one of the few shows ever to perform karate.
1993 also saw its debut of the medical-mystery drama, "Diagnosis Murder", a comeback vehicle for Dick Van Dyke, who guest-starred on an episode of its sequel, "Jake and The Fatman", where the show got off to a rocky start, and became one of television's long-running mysteries, that lasted until its cancelation in 2001.
Medical dramas started to come into television in the ’90s. One show stood out as a critical and ratings success for NBC. In 1994, "ER", which starred Anthony Edwards and George Clooney, was a domestic and international success, lasting until 2009 and spawning series such as "Grey's Anatomy" (2005–present). It made NBC the most watched channel in the USA. This show launched the career of George Clooney.
"Beverly Hills, 90210" ran on Fox from 1990 to 2000. It established the teen soap genre paving the way for "Dawson's Creek", "Felicity", and other shows airing in later years. The show was then remade and renamed simply "90210" and premiered in 2008. "Melrose Place", a popular TV show that dominated throughout the ’90s as well. "Baywatch", a popular TV show that dominated throughout the ’90s, became the most watched TV show in history and influenced pop culture.
Television still saw the fantasy when CBS aired "Touched By an Angel", beginning in 1994, which was intended for the comeback vehicle of Della Reese, whose show also launched the career of Roma Downey. It wasn't an immediate hit, being the overly-religious show that it was, and was canceled the following year. But revived the following year, thanks to die hard fans who approached a letter-writing campaign, where it ran for 8 more seasons.
Reality television began on MTV; this would grow in importance in the western world into the next decade.
During the mid-1990s, two of the biggest professional wrestling companies: "World Championship Wrestling" and "World Wrestling Federation" were in a ratings battle that was dubbed the Monday Night Wars (1995–2001). Each company fought to draw more viewers to their respective Monday night wrestling show. The "War" ended in 2001 when "WWE" bought "WCW". In November 2001, there was a Winner Takes All match with both companies in a Pay-Per-View called "Survivor Series". WWF won the match; putting a final end to WCW.
As an animated sitcom, "The Simpsons", debuted in December 1989, became a domestic and international success in the 1990s. The show has aired more than 500 episodes and has become an institution of pop culture. It has spawned the adult-oriented animated sitcom genre, inspiring racier shows such as "Beavis and Butt-head" (1993–1997) along with "South Park" and "Family Guy", the latter two of which began in 1997 and 1999 respectively and continue to air new episodes through the 2000s and into the 2010s.
Anime was popular in the 1980s, and expanded to a worldwide audience by the 1990s, for its expansive spectrum of story subjects and themes not limited to comedy and superhero action found in the US, and well produced, and well written, visual and story content, that held emotional and intellectual depth and integrity to its viewers, and which also expanded to older and adult ages in the medium of animation. TV shows such as "Sailor Moon", "Digimon", "Pokémon", "Tenchi Muyo!", "Dragon Ball Z", "Gundam Wing", "Neon Genesis Evangelion", "Ranma 1/2", "Dirty Pair", "Slayers", "Rurouni Kenshin", "Gunsmith Cats", to anime movies such as "Akira", "Vampire Hunter D", "My Neighbor Totoro", "Princess Mononoke", "Castle in the Sky", "The Castle of Cagliostro", and imports by various distributors such as Viz, AnimEigo, Central Park Media, A.D. Vision, Pioneer Entertainment, Media Blasters, Manga Entertainment, and Celebrity, helped begin the mid to late 1990s and early to mid-2000s introductory anime craze in the US, and the Cartoon Network anime block Toonami in 1997.
Nickelodeon's first animated series ("Doug", "Rugrats", "The Ren & Stimpy Show") debuted in 1991. One of Nickelodeon's most popular and longest running series, "SpongeBob SquarePants", started in 1999 and became a huge success.
American animated children’s programs went through a renaissance during the decade with studios producing many critically acclaimed shows. Examples include "Tiny Toon Adventures", "Animaniacs", "Phantom 2040", ', and '.
Video gaming.
Popular notable video games of the 1990s include: "Metal Gear Solid", "Super Mario World", "Donkey Kong Country", "Pokémon Red and Blue Versions", "Pokémon Yellow Version", "GoldenEye 007", "Super Mario 64", "", "Gran Turismo", "Mario Kart 64", "Half-Life", "Super Mario Kart", "Star Fox (series), "Tomb Raider" series, "Final Fantasy", "Crash Bandicoot" series, "Resident Evil" series, "Street Fighter II", "Spyro the Dragon" series, "Commander Keen" series, "Test Drive" series, "Monkey Island", "Dune" series, "Mortal Kombat" series, "Warcraft" series, "Duke Nukem 3D", "Tekken" series, "StarCraft", and specially "Sonic the Hedgehog" series.
Sony’s PlayStation becomes the top selling game console and changes the standard media storage type from cartridges to compact discs in consoles. Crash Bandicoot is released on 9 September 1996, becoming one of the most successful platforming series for the Sony PlayStation. "Tomb Raider"’s (PlayStation) Lara Croft became a video game sex symbol, becoming a recognizable figure in the entertainment industry throughout the late 1990s.
3-D graphics become the standard by end of decade. Although FPSs had long since seen the transition to full 3D, other genres begin to copy this trend by the end of the decade. Most notable first shooter games in the 1990s are "GoldenEye 007" and "Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six".
The console wars, primarily between Sega (Mega Drive, marketed as the Sega Genesis in North America, introduced in 1988) and Nintendo (Super NES, introduced in 1990), sees the entrance of Sony with the PlayStation in 1994, which becomes the first successful CD-based console (as opposed to cartridges). By the end of the decade, Sega’s hold on the market becomes tenuous after the end of the Saturn in 1999 and the Dreamcast in 2002.
Mario as Nintendo’s mascot finds a rival in Sega’s Sonic the Hedgehog with the release of "Sonic the Hedgehog" on the Genesis in 1991.
Arcade games rapidly decrease in popularity.
Fighting games like Capcom’s "Street Fighter II", Sega’s futuristic "Virtua Fighter", and especially the more violent "Mortal Kombat" from Midway prompted the video game industry to adopt a game rating system. Hundreds of knock-offs are widely popular in mid-to-late 1990s. "Doom" (1993) bursts onto the world scene, and instantly popularizes the FPS genre, and even how games are played, as "Doom" is among the first games to feature multiplayer capabilities. It isn’t until "Quake" (1996), however, that game developers begin to take multiplayer features into serious consideration when making games. "Half-Life" (1998) features the next evolutionary step in the genre with continual progression of the game (no levels in the traditional sense) and an entirely in-person view, and becomes one of the most popular computer games in history.
The real-time strategy (RTS) genre is introduced in 1992 with the release of "Dune II". ' (1994) popularizes the genre, with "Command & Conquer" and ' in 1995, setting up the first major real-time strategy competition and popularizing multiplayer capabilities in RTS games. "StarCraft" in 1998 becomes the second best-selling computer game of all time. It remains among the most popular multiplayer RTS games to this day, especially in South Korea. "Homeworld" in 1999 becomes the first successful 3d RTS game. The rise of the RTS genre is often credited with the fall of the turn-based strategy (TBS) genre, popularized with "Civilization" in 1991. "Final Fantasy" debuted (in North America) in 1990 for the NES, and remains among the most popular video game franchises, with many new titles to date and more in development, plus numerous spin-offs, sequels, films and related titles. "Final Fantasy VII", released in 1997, especially popularized the series.
Massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) see their entrance into the computer game world with "Ultima Online" in 1997, although they don’t gain widespread popularity until "EverQuest" and "Asheron's Call" in 1999. MMORPGs go on to become among the most popular genres in the first decade of the 21st century.
Pokémon enters the world scene with the release of the original Game Boy "Pokémon Red" and "Pokémon Green" games in Japan in 1996, later changed to "Pokémon Red" and "Pokémon Blue" for worldwide release in 1998. It soon becomes popular in the U.S., spurring the term Pokémania and is adapted into a popular anime series and trading card game, among other media forms.
"Resident Evil" is released in 1996. It becomes the most popular survival-horror series in video gaming well into the next decade and inspires several films.
"Crash Bandicoot" is released in September 1996, becoming an innovative platformer for the Sony PlayStation.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1990 • 1991 • 1992 • 1993 • 1994 • 1995 • 1996 • 1997 • 1998 • 1999

</doc>
<doc id="34557" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34557" title="1980s">
1980s

The 1980s was a decade that began on January 1, 1980, and ended on December 31, 1989.
The time period saw great social, economic, and general change as wealth and production migrated to newly industrializing economies. As economic liberalization increased in the developed world, multiple multinational corporations associated with the manufacturing industry relocated into Thailand, Mexico, South Korea, Taiwan, and China. Japan and West Germany as these were the most notable developed countries that continued to enjoy rapid economic growth during the decade. 
The United Kingdom and the United States moved closer to laissez-faire economic policies beginning a trend towards neoliberalism that would pick up more steam in the following decade as the fall of the USSR made right wing economic policy more popular.
Developing countries across the world faced economic and social difficulties as they suffered from multiple debt crises in the 1980s, requiring many of these countries to apply for financial assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. Ethiopia witnessed widespread famine in the mid-1980s during the corrupt rule of Mengistu Haile Mariam, resulting in the country having to depend on foreign aid to provide food to its population and worldwide efforts to address and raise money to help Ethiopians, such as the Live Aid concert in 1985.
Television viewing became commonplace in the Third World, with the number of TV sets in China and India increasing by 15 and 10 times respectively. 
Major civil discontent and violence occurred in the Middle East, including the Iran-Iraq War, the Soviet-Afghan War, the 1982 Lebanon War, the Nagorno-Karabakh War, the Bombing of Libya in 1986, and the First Intifada in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
Despite a peak in tensions in the early part of the decade, by the late 1980s the Cold War was coming to an end. In the eastern bloc hostility to authoritarianism and the rise of nationalism in communist-led socialist states, combined with economic recession resulted in a wave of reformist policies instigated by Mikhail Gorbachev in the USSR - such as "perestroika" and "glasnost", along with the overthrow and attempted overthrow of a number of communist regimes, such as in Hungary, the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 in China, the Czechoslovak "Velvet Revolution", Poland, and the overthrow of the Nicolae Ceauşescu regime in Romania and other communist Warsaw Pact states in Central and Eastern Europe including the Fall of the Berlin Wall. It came to be called the "end of history". By 1989 the Soviet Union announced the abandonment of political hostility toward the Western world and the Cold War ended with the USSR's demise after the August Coup of 1991. The changes of the revolutions of 1989 continue to be felt today.
The 1980s saw the development of the modern Internet, starting with the specification of File Transfer Protocol in 1980 and ARPANET's move to TCP/IP around 1982–83. Approximately 1.1 million people (86% of them in the United States) were using the Internet at the end of the 1980s. Tim Berners Lee created a hypertext system called ENQUIRE in 1980 and began his work on the World Wide Web in March 1989; after its first demonstration at the end of 1990 it was released to the public in July 1991 and by approximately 1995 became widely known, beginning the ongoing worldwide boom of Internet use.
People born in the 1980s are usually classified along with those born in the 1990s as part of the Millennial generation.
The issue of global warming first came to the attention of the public in the late 1980s, largely due to the Yellowstone fires of 1988.
The sexually transmitted disease AIDS caused by HIV was discovered in 1984 and has since killed over 50 million people.
Politics and wars.
Terrorist attacks.
The most notable terrorist attacks of the decade include:
Wars.
The most prominent armed conflicts of the decade include:
International wars.
The most notable wars of the decade include:
Civil wars and guerrilla wars.
The most notable Internal conflicts of the decade include:
Coups.
The most prominent coups d'état of the decade include:
Prominent political events.
Americas
Europe
Asia
Assaults.
The 1980s were marked by several notable assassinations and assassination attempts:
Technology.
Electronics and computers.
Arcade games and video games had been growing in popularity since the late 1970s, and by 1982 were a major industry. But a variety of factors, including a glut of low-quality games and the rise of home computers, caused a tremendous crash in late 1983. For the next three years, the video game market practically ceased to exist in the US. But in the second half of the decade, it would be revived by Nintendo, whose Famicom console and mascot Mario had been enjoying considerable success in Japan since 1983. Renamed the Nintendo Entertainment System, it would claim 90% of the American video game market by 1989.
Personal computers experienced explosive growth in the 1980s, going from being a toy for electronics hobbyists to a full-fledged industry. The IBM PC, launched in 1981, became the dominant computer for professional users. Commodore created the most popular home computers of both 8-bit and 16-bit generations. MSX standard was the dominant computer platform in Japan. Apple phased out its Apple II and Lisa models, and introduced the first Macintosh computer in 1984. It was the first commercially successful personal computer to use a graphical user interface and mouse, which started to become general features in computers after the middle of the decade.
Walkman and Boomboxes, introduced during the late 1970s, became very popular and had a profound impact on the Music industry and youth culture. Consumer VCRs and video rental stores became commonplace as VHS won out over the competing betamax standard. In addition, in the early 1980s various companies began selling compact, modestly priced synthesizers to the public. This, along with the development of Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI), made it easier to integrate and synchronize synthesizers and other electronic instruments, like drum machines, for use in musical composition.
High definition television (HDTV) of both the analog and digital variety were first developed in the 1980s though their use did not become widespread until the mid-2000s.
Space exploration.
American interplanetary probes continued in the 1980s, the Voyager duo being the most known. After making a flyby of Jupiter in 1979, they went near Saturn in 1980–1981. Voyager 2 reached Uranus in 1986 (just a few days before the Challenger disaster), and Neptune in 1989 before the probes exited the solar system.
No American probes were launched to Mars in the 1980s, and the Viking probes, launched there in 1975, completed their operations by 1982. The Soviets launched two Mars probes in 1988, but they failed.
The arrival of Halley's Comet in 1986 was met by a series of American, Soviet, Japanese, and ESA probes.
After a five-year hiatus, manned American space flights resumed with the launch of the space shuttle Columbia in April 1981. The shuttle program progressed smoothly from there, with three more orbiters entering service in 1983–1985. But that all came to an end with the tragic loss of the Challenger on January 28, 1986, taking with it seven astronauts, including Christia McAuliffe, who was to have been the first teacher in space. In full view of the world, a faulty O-ring on the right solid rocket booster allowed hot gases to burn through the external fuel tank and cause it to explode, destroying the shuttle in the process. Extensive efforts were made to improve NASA's increasingly careless management practices, and to make the shuttle safer. Flights resumed with the launch of Discovery in September 1988.
The Soviet manned program went well during the decade, experiencing only minor setbacks. The Salyut 6 space station, launched in 1977, was replaced by Salyut 7 in 1982. Then came Mir in 1986, which ended up operating for more than a decade, and was destined to be the last in the line of Soviet space stations that had begun in 1971. One of the Soviet Union's last "superprojects" was the Buran space shuttle; it was only used once, in 1988.
Automobiles.
The American auto industry began the 1980s in a thoroughly grim situation, faced with poor quality control, rising import competition, and a severe economic downturn. Chrysler and American Motors (AMC) were near bankruptcy, and Ford was little better off. Only GM continued with business as usual. But the auto makers recovered with the economy by 1983, and in 1985 auto sales in the United States hit a new record. However, the Japanese were now a major presence, and would begin manufacturing cars in the US to get around tariffs. In 1986, Hyundai became the first Korean auto maker to enter the American market. In the same year, the Yugoslavian-built Yugo was brought to the US, but the car was so small and cheap, that it became the subject of jokes. It was sold up to 1991, when economic sanctions against Yugoslavia forced its withdrawal from the American market.
As the decade progressed, cars became smaller and more efficient in design. In 1983, Ford design teams began to incorporate aerodynamic styling to decrease drag while in motion. The Thunderbird was one of the first cars to receive these design changes. In 1985, Ford released the Taurus with an design that was revolutionary among domestic mass market automobiles.
General Motors began suffering significant losses in the late-1980s, partially the result of chairman Roger Smith's restructuring attempts, and partially because of increasingly dated cars. An example were customers who increasingly purchased European luxury cars rather than Cadillacs. In 1985, GM started Saturn (the first new American make since the Edsel), with the goal of producing high-quality import fighters. Production would not begin until 1990.
Chrysler introduced its new compact, front-wheel drive K-cars in 1981. Under the leadership of Lee Iacocca, the company turned a profit again the following year, and by 1983 paid off its government loans. A succession of models using this automobile platform followed. The most significant were the minivans in 1984. These proved a to be popular and they would dominate the van market for more than a decade. In 1987, Chrysler purchased the Italian makes of Lamborghini and Maserati. In the same year, Chrysler bought AMC from Renault laying to rest the last significant independent U.S. automaker, but acquiring the hugely profitable Jeep line and continuing the Eagle brand until the late 1990s.
The DeLorean DMC-12 was the brainchild of John DeLorean, a flamboyant former GM executive. Production of the gull-winged sports car began in Northern Ireland in 1981. John DeLorean was arrested in October 1982 in a sting operation where he was attempting to sell cocaine to save his struggling company. He was acquitted of all charges in 1984, but too late for the DeLorean Motor Company, which closed down in 1983. The DMC-12 gained renewed fame afterward as the time machine in the "Back to the Future" motion picture trilogy.
The imposition of CAFE fuel-mileage standards in 1979 spelled the end of big-block engines, but performance cars and convertibles reemerged in the 1980s. Turbochargers were widely used to boost the performance of small cars, and technology from fuel injection began to take over from the widely used application of carburetors by the late 1980s. Front-wheel drive also became dominant.
The eighties marked the decline of European brands in North America by the end of the decade. Renault, Citroen, and Peugeot ceased importation by the end of the decade. Alfa Romeo would continue until 1993. Fiat also ceased imports to North America in the eighties.
Society.
The 1980s was also an era of tremendous population growth around the world, surpassing even the 1970s and 1990s, thus arguably being the largest in human history. Population growth was particularly rapid in a number of African, Middle Eastern, and South Asian countries during this decade, with rates of natural increase close to or exceeding 4% annually.
Popular culture.
The most prominent events and trends in popular culture of the decade include:
Music.
In the United States, MTV was launched and music videos began to have a larger effect on the record industry. Pop artists such as Michael Jackson, Whitney Houston, Duran Duran, Prince, and Madonna mastered the format and helped turn this new product into a profitable business. New wave and Synthpop were developed by many British and American artists, and became popular phenomena throughout the decade, especially in the early and mid-eighties. Music grew fragmented and combined into subgenres such as house, goth, and rap metal.
Michael Jackson was the definitive icon of the 1980s and his leather jacket, glove, and Moonwalk dance were often imitated. Jackson's 1982 album "Thriller" became—and currently remains—the best-selling album of all time, with sales estimated by various sources as somewhere between 65 and 110 million copies worldwide.
Madonna and Whitney Houston were regarded as the most ground breaking female artists of the decade. The keyboard synthesizer and drum machine were among the most popular instruments in music during the 1980s, especially in new wave music. After the 1980s electronic instruments were no longer popular in rock but continued to be the main component of mainstream pop.
Hard rock, heavy metal, and glam metal became some of the most dominant music genres of the decade, peaking with the arrival of such bands as Mötley Crüe, Hanoi Rocks, Guns N' Roses, Metallica, Iron Maiden, Bon Jovi, Def Leppard, Poison, Europe, Megadeth, Slayer, Anthrax, and virtuoso guitarists such as Joe Satriani and Yngwie Malmsteen. The scene also helped 1970s hard rock artists such as AC/DC, Ozzy Osbourne, Queen, Van Halen, KISS, Ronnie James Dio, and Judas Priest reach a new generation of fans.
By 1989, the hip hop scene had evolved, gaining recognition and exhibiting a stronger influence on the music industry. This time period is also considered part of the golden age of hip hop. The Beastie Boys, Public Enemy, Run-D.M.C., Grandmaster Flash, the Furious Five, Boogie Down Productions, N.W.A, LL Cool J, De La Soul, A Tribe Called Quest, EPMD, Eric B. & Rakim, Ice-T, DJ Jazzy Jeff & The Fresh Prince, 2 Live Crew, Tone Lōc, Biz Markie, the Jungle Brothers, The Sugar Hill Gang and others experienced success in this genre.
Ex-Beatle John Lennon released his last album, "Double Fantasy", and won Album of the Year at the 1982 Grammy Awards.
Country music came to the forefront with youth appeal and record breaking marks with groundbreaking artists, such as Alabama and Hank Williams Jr. to achieved multiple platinum and award status.
The Techno style of electronic dance music emerged in Detroit, Michigan during the mid- to late 1980s. The House music style, another form of electronic dance music, emerged in Chicago, Illinois in the early 1980s. It was initially popularized in mid-1980s discothèques catering to the African-American, Latino and gay communities, first in Chicago, then in New York City and Detroit. It eventually reached Europe before becoming infused in mainstream pop and dance music worldwide.
Punk rock continued to make strides in the musical community; With bands leading the significance of this period such as Black Flag, Bad Brains, Minor Threat, and Dead Kennedys, it gave birth to many subgenres like hardcore, which has continued to be moderately successful, giving birth in turn to a few counterculture movements, most notably the Straight Edge movement which began in the early era of this decade. College rock caught on in the underground scene of the 1980s in a nationwide movement with a distinct D.I.Y approach. Bands like the Pixies, R.E.M., The Replacements, Sonic Youth, XTC, The Smiths, The Jesus and Mary Chain etc. experienced success in this genre. The 1980s also saw the birth of the grunge genre, with the arrival of such bands as Soundgarden, Green River, Melvins, Screaming Trees, Malfunkshun, Skin Yard, The U-Men, Blood Circus, Nirvana, Tad, Mudhoney, Mother Love Bone and Alice in Chains (who formed in 1987, but did not release their first album until three years later).
Several notable music artists died of unnatural causes in the 1980s. Bon Scott, at the time lead singer of rock band AC/DC died of acute alcohol poisoning on February 19, 1980. Coincidentally, English drummer John Bonham of the rock band Led Zeppelin also died that year in similar fashion. John Lennon was shot outside his home in New York City on the night of December 8, 1980. Tim Hardin died of a heroin overdose on December 29, 1980. Bob Marley died from a lentiginous skin melanoma on May 11, 1981. Marvin Gaye was shot dead by his father at his home in Los Angeles on April 1, 1984, one day before what would have been his 45th birthday. Ozzy Osbourne's guitarist Randy Rhoads died in an airplane crash on March 19, 1982. Metallica bassist Cliff Burton was killed in a bus accident in Sweden on September 27, 1986. Andy Gibb died in 1988 as a result of myocarditis.
1985's Live Aid concert, featuring many artists, promoted attention and action to send food aid to Ethiopia whose people were suffering from a major famine.
Film.
This was the period when the 'high concept' films were introduced. The movies were supposed to be easily marketable and understandable, and, therefore, they had short cinematic plots that could be summarized in one or two sentences. The modern Hollywood blockbuster is the most popular film format from the 1980s. Producer Don Simpson is usually credited with the creation of the high-concept picture of the modern Hollywood blockbuster.
The 80s also spawned the Brat Pack films, many of which were directed by John Hughes. Films such as "Class (film), The Breakfast Club, Fast Times at Ridgemont High, Mannequin (1987 film), Porky's, Pretty In Pink, Sixteen Candles, St. Elmo's Fire (film), Ferris Bueller's Day Off, Weird Science", and "Valley Girl" were popular teen comedies of the era and launched the careers of several major celebrities such as: Emilio Estevez, Anthony Michael Hall, Forest Whitaker, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Andrew McCarthy, Judd Nelson, Molly Ringwald, Sean Penn, and Nicolas Cage. Other popular films included "About Last Night...", "Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure", "Dirty Dancing", "Flashdance", "Footloose", "Raging Bull" and "St. Elmo's Fire" which also launched the careers of high-profile celebrities like Demi Moore, Joe Pesci, Keanu Reeves, Kevin Bacon, Rob Lowe, and Patrick Swayze.
Horror films were a popular genre during the decade, with several notable horror franchises being born during the 1980s. Among the most popular were the "Child's Play", "A Nightmare on Elm Street", "Friday the 13th", "Hellraiser", and "Poltergeist" franchises. Aside from these films, the concept of the B horror film gave rise to a plethora of horror films that went on to earn a cult status. An example of such is the 1981 film "The Evil Dead", which marked the directorial debut of Sam Raimi.
Several action film franchises were also launched during the 1980s. The most popular of these were the "Beverly Hills Cop, Die Hard, Lethal Weapon", and "Rambo" franchises. Other action films from the decade which are of notable status include "The Terminator", and "Predator". These films propelled the careers of modern celebrities such as Arnold Schwarzenegger, Bruce Willis, Eddie Murphy, Mel Gibson, and Sylvester Stallone to international recognition.
Television.
MTV was launched in the United States in 1981 and had a profound impact on the music industry and popular culture further ahead, especially during its early run in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Some of the most popular TV series which premiered during the 1980s or carried over from the 1970s include: "Alf", "Airwolf", "The A-Team", "The Love Boat", "Lou Grant", "The Incredible Hulk", "Too Close For Comfort", "The Dukes of Hazzard", "Trapper John, M.D.", "Diff'rent Strokes", "Dynasty", "Dallas", "Knots Landing", "Falcon Crest", "Knight Rider", "Newhart", "St. Elsewhere", "MacGyver", "Magnum, P.I.", "Miami Vice", "The Jeffersons", "The Facts of Life", "The Cosby Show", "Highway To Heaven", "Murder, She Wrote", "227", "Matlock", "21 Jump Street", "", "Night Court", "Who's the Boss?", "Family Matters", "Quantum Leap", "Saved by the Bell", "Roseanne", "Full House", "The Golden Girls","Three's Company", "Cheers", "Growing Pains", "Family Ties", "Seinfeld", "The Simpsons", "the World Wrestling Federation (WWF)", "Married... with Children", "The Young Ones", "Boys from the Blackstuff", "Blackadder" and "Moonlighting".
The 1980s was the decade of transformation in television. Cable television became more accessible and therefore, more popular. By the middle of the decade, almost 70% of the American population had cable television and over 85% were paying for cable services such as HBO or Showtime.
The 1980s also saw the debut of prime-time soap operas such as "Dallas", its spin-off "Knots Landing", "Dynasty", "Falcon Crest", "EastEnders" and "Neighbours".
TV talk shows expanded in popularity; "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" remained popular into its third decade, and some of the most viewed newer shows were hosted by Geraldo Rivera, Arsenio Hall and David Letterman.
The 1980s also was prominent for spawning several popular children's cartoons such as "The Smurfs", "ThunderCats", "Voltron", "The Transformers", "Masters of the Universe", "", "Inspector Gadget", "Muppet Babies", "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles", "DuckTales", "Garfield and Friends", and "Beetlejuice.
Video gaming.
Popular video games include: "Pac-Man", "Super Mario Bros.", "The Legend of Zelda", "Metroid", "Donkey Kong", "Frogger", "Digger", "Tetris", and "Golden Axe".
"Pac-Man" (1980) was the first game to achieve widespread popularity in mainstream culture and the first game character to be popular in his own right.
Handheld electronic LCD games was introduced into the youth market segment.
The primary gaming computers of the 1980s emerged in 1982: the Commodore 64 and ZX Spectrum.
Nintendo finally decided in 1985 to release its Famicom (released in 1983 in Japan) in the United States under the name Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). It was bundled with "Super Mario Bros." and it suddenly became a success. The NES dominated the American and Japanese market until the rise of the next generation of consoles in the early 1990s, causing some to call this time the "Nintendo era".
Sega released its 16-bit console, Mega Drive/Genesis, in 1988 in Japan and in North America in 1989.
In 1989 Nintendo released the Game Boy, a monochrome handheld console.
Fashion.
The beginning of the decade saw the continuation of the clothing styles of the late 1970s and evolved into heavy metal fashion by the end; This included teased hair, ripped jeans, and neon clothing.
Significant hairstyle trends of the 1980s include the perm, the mullet, the Jheri curl, the flattop, the hi-top fade, and big hair.
Significant clothing trends of the 1980s include shoulder pads, jean jackets, leather pants, aviator jackets, jumpsuits, Diane von Fürstenberg wrap dress, Members Only jackets, skin-tight acid-washed jeans, miniskirts, leggings and leg warmers (popularized in the film "Flashdance"), off-the-shoulder shirts, and cut sweatshirts (again, popularized in the film "Flashdance").
Additional significant trends of the 1980s include headbands, Ray-Ban Aviator sunglasses (popularized in the film "Top Gun"), Ray-Ban Wayfarer sunglasses (popularized in the films "Risky Business" and "The Blues Brothers"), Swatch watches, slap bracelets (a popular fad among children, pre-teens, and teenagers in the late 1980s and early 1990s and was available in a wide variety of patterns and colors), and the Rubik's Cube (became a popular fad throughout the decade). Girls also wore jelly shoes, large crucifix necklaces, and braissers all inspired by Madonna's "Like a Virgin" video.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1980 • 1981 • 1982 • 1983 • 1984 • 1985 • 1986 • 1987 • 1988 • 1989

</doc>
<doc id="34558" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34558" title="20th century">
20th century

The 20th century was the period between
January 1, 1901 and December 31, 2000, inclusive. It was the tenth and last century of the 2nd millennium. It is distinct from the century known as the 1900s (sometimes written 19XX), which began on January 1, 1900 and ended December 31, 1999. 
The century in human history was dominated by World War I and World War II, nationalism and decolonization, the Cold War and Post-Cold War conflicts, cultural homogenization through developments in transportation and communications technology, awareness of environmental degradation, and the birth of the Digital Revolution.
Overview.
The century had the first global-scale total wars between world powers across continents and oceans in World War I and World War II. Nationalism became a major political issue in the world in the 20th century, acknowledged in international law along with the right of nations to self-determination, official decolonization in the mid-century, and nationalist-influenced armed regional-conflicts.
The century saw a major shift in the way that many people lived, with changes in politics, ideology, economics, society, culture, science, technology, and medicine. The 20th century may have seen more technological and scientific progress than all the other centuries combined since the dawn of civilization. Terms like "ideology", "world war", "genocide," and "nuclear war" entered common usage. Scientific discoveries, such as the theory of relativity and quantum physics, profoundly changed the foundational models of physical science, forcing scientists to realize that the universe was more complex than previously believed, and dashing the hopes (or fears) at the end of the 19th century that the last few details of scientific knowledge were about to be filled in. It was a century that started with horses, simple automobiles, and freighters but ended with high-speed rail, cruise ships, global commercial air travel and the space shuttle. Horses, Western society's basic form of personal transportation for thousands of years, were replaced by automobiles and buses within a few decades. These developments were made possible by the exploitation of fossil fuel resources, which offered energy in an easily portable form, but also caused concern about pollution and long-term impact on the environment. Humans explored space for the first time, taking their first footsteps on the Moon.
Mass media, telecommunications, and information technology (especially computers, paperback books, public education, and the Internet) made the world's knowledge more widely available. Advancements in medical technology also improved the welfare of many people: the global life expectancy increased from 35 years to 65 years. Rapid technological advancements, however, also allowed warfare to reach unprecedented levels of destruction. World War II alone killed over 60 million people, while nuclear weapons gave humankind the means to annihilate itself in a short time. However, these same wars resulted in the destruction of the Imperial system. For the first time in human history, empires and their wars of expansion and colonization ceased to be a factor in world affairs, resulting in a far more globalized and cooperative world. The last time major powers clashed openly was in 1945, and since then, violence has seen an unprecedented decline.
The world also became more culturally homogenized than ever with developments in transportation and communications technology, popular music and other influences of Western culture, international corporations, and what was arguably a true global economy by the end of the 20th century.
Summary.
Technological advancements during World War I changed the way war was fought, as new inventions such as tanks, chemical weapons, and aircraft modified tactics and strategy. After more than four years of trench warfare in western Europe, and 20 million dead, the powers that had formed the Triple Entente (France, Britain, and Russia, later replaced by the United States and joined by Italy) emerged victorious over the Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire). In addition to annexing much of the colonial possessions of the vanquished states, the Triple Entente exacted punitive restitution payments from them, plunging Germany in particular into economic depression. The regime of Tsar Nicholas II was overthrown during the conflict, Russia became the first communist state, and the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires were dismantled at the war's conclusion.
At the beginning of the period, Britain was the world's most powerful nation, having acted as the world's policeman for the past century. Fascism, a movement which grew out of post-war angst and which accelerated during the Great Depression of the 1930s, gained momentum in Italy, Germany and Spain in the 1920s and 1930s, culminating in World War II (1939–1945), sparked by Nazi Germany's aggressive expansion at the expense of its neighbors. Meanwhile, Japan had rapidly transformed itself into a technologically advanced industrial power. Its military expansion into eastern Asia and the Pacific Ocean culminated in a surprise attack on the United States, bringing it into World War II. After some years of dramatic military success, Germany was defeated in 1945, having been invaded by the Soviet Union and Poland from the east and by the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Free France from the west. The war ended with the dropping of two atomic bombs on Japan. Japan later became a western ally with an economy based on the manufacture of consumer goods and trade. Germany was divided between the Western powers and the Soviet Union; all areas recaptured by the Soviet Union (East Germany and eastward) became Soviet puppet states under communist rule. Meanwhile, Western European countries were influenced by the American Marshall Plan and made a quick economic recovery, becoming major allies of the United States under capitalist economies and relatively democratic governments.
World War II left about 60 million people dead. When the conflict ended in 1945, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as the major world powers. Allies during the war, they soon became hostile to one another as the competing ideologies of communism and democratic capitalism occupied Europe, divided by the Iron Curtain and the Berlin Wall. The military alliances headed by these nations (NATO in North America and Western Europe; the Warsaw Pact in Eastern Europe) threatened each other with total war in what was called the Cold War (1947–91). The period was marked by a new arms race, and nuclear weapons were produced in the tens of thousands, sufficient to end most human life on the planet had a large-scale nuclear exchange ever occurred. The size of the nuclear arsenals is believed by many historians to have staved off war between the two, as the consequences were too great to bear. The policy of massive nuclear attack, knowing a similar counterattack would be forthcoming, was called mutually assured destruction (MAD). However, several proxy wars, such as the Korean War (1950–1953) and the Vietnam War (1957–1975), were waged as the United States implemented its worldwide "containment" policy against communism.
After World War II, most of the European-colonized world in Africa and Asia gained independence in a process of decolonization. Meanwhile, the wars empowered several nations, including the UK, USA, Russia, China and Japan, to exert a strong influence over many world affairs. American culture spread around the world with the advent of Hollywood, Broadway, rock and roll, pop music, fast food, big-box stores, and the hip-hop lifestyle. Britain continued to influence world culture, including the "British Invasion" into American music, leading many rock bands from other countries (such as Swedish ABBA) to sing in English. The western world and parts of Asia enjoyed a post-World War II economic boom. After the Soviet Union collapsed under internal pressure in 1991, the communist governments of the Eastern bloc were dismantled, followed by awkward transitions into market economies.
Following World War II the United Nations, successor to the League of Nations, was established as an international forum in which the world's nations could discuss issues diplomatically. It enacted resolutions on such topics as the conduct of warfare, environmental protection, international sovereignty, and human rights. Peacekeeping forces consisting of troops provided by various countries, with various United Nations and other aid agencies, helped to relieve famine, disease, and poverty, and to suppress some local armed conflicts. Europe slowly united, economically and, in some ways, politically, to form the European Union, which consisted of 15 European countries by the end of the 20th century.
In the last third of the century, concern about humankind's impact on the Earth's environment made environmentalism popular. In many countries, especially in Europe, the movement was channeled into politics through Green parties. Increasing awareness of global warming began in the 1980s, commencing decades of social and political debate.
The nature of innovation and change.
Due to continuing industrialization and expanding trade, many significant changes of the century were, directly or indirectly, economic and technological in nature. Inventions such as the light bulb, the automobile, and the telephone in the late 19th century, followed by supertankers, airliners, motorways, radio, television, antibiotics, frozen food, computers and microcomputers, the Internet, and mobile telephones affected people's quality of life across the developed world. Scientific research, engineering professionalization and technological development drove changes in everyday life.
Social change.
At the beginning of the century, strong discrimination based on race and sex was significant in general society. Although the Atlantic slave trade had ended in the 19th century, the fight for equality for darker-skinned people in the white societies of North America, Europe, and South Africa continued. During the century, the social taboo of sexism fell. By the end of the 20th century, women had the same legal rights as men in many parts of the world, and racism had come to be seen as abhorrent.
Developments in brief.
Wars and politics.
The number of people killed during the century by government actions was in the hundreds of millions. This includes deaths caused by wars, genocide, politicide and mass murders. The deaths from acts of war during the two world wars alone have been estimated at between 50 and 80 million. Political scientist Rudolph Rummel estimated 262,000,000 deaths caused by democide, which excludes those killed in war battles, civilians unintentionally killed in war and killings of rioting mobs. According to Charles Tilly, "Altogether, about 100 million people died as a direct result of action by organized military units backed by one government or another over the course of the century. Most likely a comparable number of civilians died of war-induced disease and other indirect effects." It is estimated that approximately 70 million Europeans died through war, violence and famine between 1914 and 1945.
Science and mathematics.
Science advanced dramatically during the century. There were new and radical developments in the physical, life and human sciences, building on the progress made in the 19th century. Big Science flourished, especially after the Second World War, as funding for science increased. Mathematics became ever more specialized and abstract.
Engineering and technology.
One of the prominent traits of the 20th century was the dramatic growth of technology. Organized research and practice of science led to advancement in the fields of communication, engineering, travel, medicine, and war.
The world at the end of the 20th century.
Communications and information technology, transportation technology, and medical advances had radically altered daily lives. Europe appeared to be at a sustainable peace for the first time in recorded history. The people of the Indian subcontinent, a sixth of the world population at the end of the 20th century, had attained an indigenous independence for the first time in centuries. China, an ancient nation comprising a fifth of the world population, was finally open to the world in a new and powerful synthesis of west and east, creating a new state after the near-complete destruction of the old cultural order. With the end of colonialism and the Cold War, nearly a billion people in Africa were left in new nation states after centuries of foreign domination.
The world was undergoing its second major period of globalization; the first, which started in the 18th century, having been terminated by World War I. Since the US was in a dominant position, a major part of the process was Americanization. The influence of China and India was also rising, as the world's largest populations were rapidly integrating with the world economy.
Terrorism, dictatorship, and the spread of nuclear weapons were some issues requiring attention. The world was still blighted by small-scale wars and other violent conflicts, fueled by competition over resources and by ethnic conflicts. Despots such as Kim Jong-il of North Korea continued to lead their nations toward the development of nuclear weapons.
Disease threatened to destabilize many regions of the world. New viruses such as SARS and West Nile continued to spread. Malaria and other diseases affected large populations. Millions were infected with HIV, the virus which causes AIDS. The virus was becoming an epidemic in southern Africa.
Based on research done by climate scientists, the majority of the scientific community consider that in the long term environmental problems may threaten the planet's habitability. One argument is that of global warming occurring, and that it may be due (at least partially) to human-caused emission of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide produced by the burning of fossil fuels. This prompted many nations to negotiate and sign the Kyoto treaty, which set mandatory limits on carbon dioxide emissions.
World population increased from about 1.6 billion people in 1901 to 6.1 billion at the century's end.

</doc>
<doc id="34562" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34562" title="Death rates in the 20th century">
Death rates in the 20th century

According to the CIA World Factbook, as of July 2012, the global crude death rate is 7.99 deaths/1,000 population. The crude death rate represents the total number of deaths per year per thousand people. Comparatively, the crude death rate in the year 1900 was 17.2 deaths/1,000 population and 9.6 deaths/1,000 population in 1950 in America.
Highest crude death rates worldwide.
CIA- The World Fact book 
Cause of death.
Throughout the 20th century in the developed world, the leading causes of death transitioned from infectious diseases such as influenza, to degenerative diseases such as cancer or diabetes. In 1900, the leading cause of death in the United States was influenza with 202.2 deaths per 100,000 people followed by tuberculosis with 194.4, which is a curable illness today. In the middle of 20th century America, the leading cause of death was heart disease with an impressive 355.5 deaths per 100,000 followed by cancer at 139.8 deaths per 100,000. Although death rates dropped significantly in the latter part of the 20th century, the leading killers are still constant. The United States saw 192.9 people per 100,000 die from heart disease in 2010 followed by cancer with 185.9 people per 100,000.
The world population in the 20th century experienced a large amount of death due to two major world wars. World War II was responsible for the most war related deaths in the 1900s with a death toll between 40,000,000 and 72,000,000 deaths. Other predominate wars in the 1900s include World War I with up to 65,000,000 deaths, the Russian Civil War with up to 9,000,000 deaths, the Afghan Civil War with up to 2,000,000 deaths, and the Mexican Revolution with up to 2,000,000 deaths. Several other major wars took place in the 20th century, such as the Iran-Iraq war, the Soviet War in Afghanistan, the second Sudanese civil war, the Korean War and the Vietnam war.
It is estimated that car accidents caused the death of around 60 million people during the 20th century.
Aging population.
A natural population increase occurs when birth rates are higher than death rates. Recently and most notably, the years immediately after World War II saw an explosion in birth rates called the Baby Boom as returning soldiers and displaced people started new families. Death rates were significantly lower during the baby boom and thus populations increased substantially. Today these baby boomers are approaching old age and driving up the average age of the overall population. The World Bank predicts a dramatic decrease in population size from the increase in death rates over the next decade or so.
Fertility rates and consequently live birth rates declined over the century, while age-adjusted death rates fell more dramatically. Children in 1999 were 10 times less likely to die than children in 1900.
For adults 24–65, death rates have been halved. The death rate for Americans aged 65 to 74 fell from nearly 7% per year to fewer than 2% per year.
The introduction of vaccines for several diseases led to reduced mortality from them. Again developed countries felt the greatest benefit. In the 20th century, vaccines became available for many diseases which caused deaths: diphtheria, pertussis, tuberculosis, tetanus, yellow fever, polio, measles, hepatitis among others.
However, war, genocide and Holocausts have led to many millions of deaths throughout the century, and late in the century AIDS had already killed millions, particularly in Africa and south-east Asia. Cancer also killed millions via lifestyle and pollution generated by industrialisation.
Improvements in public health.
During the 20th century, an enormous improvement in public health led to an overall decrease in death rates. Infant mortality rates and maternal mortality rates have dramatically decreased. In the early 1900s, 6-9 women died in pregnancy-related complications for every 1,000 births, while 100 infants died before they were 1 year old. In 1999, at the end of the century, the infant mortality rate in the United States declined more than 90% to 7.2 deaths per 1,000 live births. Similarly, maternal mortality rates declined almost 99% to less than 0.1 reported deaths per 1,000 live births.
There are a variety of causes for this steep decline in death rates in the 20th century:
• Environmental interventions
• Improvement in nutrition
• Advances in clinical medicine (sulfonamide in 1937, penicillin in the 1940s)
• Improved access to health care
• Improvements in surveillance and monitoring disease
• Increases in education levels
• Improvement in standards of living.
Despite these tremendous decreases in infant mortality and maternal mortality, the 20th century experienced significant disparities between minority death rates compared to death rates for white mothers. In the 1900s, black women were twice as likely to die while giving birth compared to white women. Towards the end of the 20th century, black women are three times as likely to die while giving birth. This disparity is often cited as a lack in stronger Health care in the United States.

</doc>
<doc id="34566" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34566" title="1040">
1040

<onlyinclude>
Year 1040 (MXL) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. It is the 40th year of the 11th century and of the 2nd millennium, and is the first year of the 1040s decade.
Notable dates.
Deaths.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34567" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34567" title="15th century">
15th century

The 15th century was the century which spans the Julian years 1401 to 1500.
In European history, the 15th century is seen as the bridge between the Late Middle Ages, the Early Renaissance, and the Early modern period. 
Many technological, social and cultural developments of the 15th century can in retrospect be seen as heralding the "European miracle" of the following centuries. In religious history, the Roman Papacy was split in two parts in Europe for decades (the so-called Western Schism), until the Council of Constance. The division of the Catholic Church and the unrest associated with the Hussite movement would give rise to the Protestant Reformation in the following century.
Constantinople, the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire, falls to emerging Ottoman Turks, forcing Western Europeans to find a new trade route. At the same time, the beginning Age of Sail allows Spanish and Portuguese explorations led to the first European sightings of the Americas (the New World) and the sea passage along Cape of Good Hope to India, in the last decade of the century. The Spanish Reconquista leads to the final fall of the Emirate of Granada by the end of the century.
In Asia, under the rule of the Yongle Emperor, who built the Forbidden City and commanded Zheng He to explore the world overseas, the Ming Dynasty's territory reached its pinnacle. 
Tamerlane established a major empire in the Middle East and Central Asia, in order to revive the Mongolian Empire.
In Africa, the spread of Islam leads to the destruction of the Christian kingdoms of Nubia, by the end of the century leaving only Alodia (which was to collapse in 1504). The formerly vast Mali Empire teeters on the brink of collapse, under pressure from the rising Songhai Empire.
In the Americas, both the Inca Empire and the Aztec Triple Alliance reach the peak of their influence.
Events.
1400s
1410s
1420s
1430s
1440s
1450s
1460s
1470s
1480s
1490s-1500
Significant people.
Visual artists, architects, sculptors, printmakers, illustrators.
See links above for Italian Renaissance painting and Renaissance sculpture.
Inventions, discoveries, introductions.
List of 15th century inventions

</doc>
<doc id="34568" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34568" title="16th century">
16th century

The 16th century begins with the Julian year 1501 and ends with either the Julian or the Gregorian year 1600 (depending on the reckoning used; the Gregorian calendar introduced a lapse of 10 days in October 1582).
It is regarded by historians as the century in which the rise of the West occurred.
During the 16th century, Spain and Portugal explored the world's seas and opened world-wide oceanic trade routes. Large parts of the New World became Spanish and Portuguese colonies, and while the Portuguese became the masters of Asia's and Africa's Indian Ocean trade, the Spanish opened trade across the Pacific Ocean, linking the Americas with Asia.
In Europe, the Protestant Reformation gave a major blow to the authority of the papacy and the Roman Catholic Church. European politics became dominated by religious conflicts, with the groundwork for the epochal Thirty Years' War being laid towards the end of the century.
In the Middle East, the Ottoman Empire continued to expand, with the Sultan taking the title of Caliph, while dealing with a resurgent Persia. Iran and Iraq were caught by major popularity of the once-obscure Shiite sect of Islam under the rule of the Safavid dynasty of warrior-mystics, providing grounds for a Persia independent of the majority-Sunni Muslim world.
China evacuated the coastal areas, because of Japanese piracy. Japan was suffering a severe civil war at the time.
Mughal Emperor Akbar extended the power of the Mughal Empire to cover most of the Indian sub continent. His rule significantly influenced arts, and culture in the region.
Copernicus proposed the heliocentric universe, which was met with strong resistance, and Tycho Brahe refuted the theory of celestial spheres through observational measurement of the 1572 appearance of a Milky Way supernova. These events directly challenged the long-held notion of an immutable universe supported by Ptolemy and Aristotle, and led to major revolutions in astronomy and science.

</doc>
<doc id="34569" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34569" title="17th century">
17th century

The 17th century was the century that lasted from January 1, 1601, to December 31, 1699, in the Gregorian calendar.
The 17th century falls into the Early Modern period of Europe and in that continent was characterized by the Dutch Golden Age, the Baroque cultural movement, the French "Grand Siècle" dominated by Louis XIV, the Scientific Revolution, and The General Crisis. This last is characterised in Europe most notably by the Thirty Years' War, the Great Turkish War, the end of the Dutch Revolt, the disintegration of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and the English Civil War.
Some historians extend the scope of the General Crisis to encompass the globe, as with the demographic collapse of the Ming Dynasty, China lost approximately 30% of its population. It was during this period also that European colonization of the Americas began in earnest, including the exploitation of the silver deposits of Potosí in Upper Peru and Mexico, which resulted in great bouts of inflation as wealth was drawn into Europe from the rest of the world.
In the midst of this global General Crisis, there were victory and triumph: In the Near East, the Ottoman, Safavid Persian and Mughal empires grew in strength and the Sikhs began to rise to power in the Punjab. And marathas established in western India. Farther east in Japan, Tokugawa Ieyasu established the Edo period at the beginning of the century, starting the isolationist Sakoku policy that was to last until the 19th century. In China, the collapsing Ming Dynasty was challenged by a series of conquests led by the Manchu warlord Nurhaci, which were consolidated by his son Hong Taiji and finally consummated by his grandson, the Shunzi Emperor, founder of the Qing Dynasty.
European politics during the Crisis were dominated by the France of Louis XIV, where royal power was solidified domestically in the civil war of the Fronde, in which the semi-feudal territorial French nobility was weakened and subjugated to the power of an absolute monarchy through the reinvention of the Palace of Versailles from a hunting lodge to a gilded prison in which a greatly expanded royal court could be more easily kept under surveillance. With domestic peace assured, Louis XIV caused the borders of France to be expanded to include, among other regions, Roussillon, Artois, Dunkirk, Franche-Comté, Strasbourg, Alsace and Lorraine. It was during this century that England's political system became unique in Europe – by the end of the century, the monarch was a symbolic figurehead and Parliament was the dominant force in government – a stark contrast to the rest of Europe, in particular Louis XIV's France.
By the end of the century, Europeans were also aware of logarithms, electricity, the telescope and microscope, calculus, universal gravitation, Newton's Laws of Motion, air pressure and calculating machines due to the work of the first scientists of the Scientific Revolution, including Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, René Descartes, Pierre Fermat, Blaise Pascal, Robert Boyle, Christiaan Huygens, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, Robert Hooke, Isaac Newton, and Gottfried Leibniz, among other luminaries.
Events.
1610s.
1610]]: Pedro de Peralta, governor of New Mexico, establishes the settlement of Santa Fe.
Significant people.
Science and philosophy.
 
Inventions, discoveries, introductions.
Major changes in philosophy and science take place, often characterized as the Scientific revolution.

</doc>
<doc id="34570" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34570" title="18th century">
18th century

The 18th century lasted from January 1, 1701 to December 31, 1800 in the Gregorian calendar.
During the 18th century, the Enlightenment culminated in the French and American revolutions. Philosophy and science increased in prominence. Philosophers dreamed of a brighter age. This dream turned into a reality with the French Revolution, although it was later compromised by the excesses of the Reign of Terror of Maximilien Robespierre. At first, the monarchies of Europe embraced Enlightenment ideals, but with the French Revolution they feared losing their power and formed broad coalitions for the counter-revolution.
The Ottoman Empire underwent a protracted decline, as it failed to keep up with the technological advances in Europe. The Tulip period symbolized a period of peace and reorientation towards European society, after victory against a burgeoning Russian Empire in the Pruth River Campaign. Throughout the century various reforms were introduced with limited success.
The 18th century also marked the end of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth as an independent state. The once powerful and vast kingdom, that was once able to conquer Moscow and defeat the great Ottoman armies, collapsed under numerous invasions. Its semi-democratic government system was not robust enough to rival the neighbouring monarchies of the Kingdom of Prussia, the Russian Empire and the Archduchy of Austria which divided the Commonwealth territories among them, changing the landscape of Central European politics for the next hundred years.
Great Britain became a major power worldwide with the defeat of France in the Americas in the 1760s, and the conquest of large parts of India. However, Britain lost much of its North American colonies after the American Revolution, which was actively helped by the French. The Industrial Revolution started in Britain in the 1770s with the production of the improved steam engine. Despite its modest beginnings in the 18th century, it would radically change human society and the environment.
Western historians have occasionally defined the 18th century otherwise for the purposes of their work. For example, the "short" 18th century may be defined as 1715–1789, denoting the period of time between the death of Louis XIV of France and the start of the French Revolution with an emphasis on directly interconnected events. To historians who expand the century to include larger historical movements, the "long" 18th century may run from the Glorious Revolution of 1688 to the Battle of Waterloo in 1815 or even later.

</doc>
<doc id="34573" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34573" title="1950s">
1950s

The 1950s or the Fifties was a decade that began January 1, 1950, and ended December 31, 1959.
By its end, the world had largely recovered from World War II and the Cold War developed from its modest beginning in the late 1940s to a hot competition between the United States and the Soviet Union by the beginning of the 1960s. 
Clashes between communism and capitalism dominated the decade, especially in the Northern Hemisphere. The conflicts included the Korean War in the beginnings of the decade and the beginning of the Space Race with the launch of Sputnik I. Along with increased testing of nuclear weapons (such as RDS-37 and Upshot-Knothole), this created a politically conservative climate. In the United States, the The Second Red Scare caused Congressional hearings by both houses in Congress and anti-communism was the prevailing sentiment in the United States throughout the decade. The beginning of decolonization in Africa and Asia occurred in this decade and accelerated in the following decade, the 1960s.
International issues.
Disasters.
Natural:
Non-natural:
Economics.
Inflation was moderate during the decade of the 1950s. The first few months had a deflationary hangover from the 1940s but the first full year ended with what looked like the beginnings of massive inflation with annual inflation rates ranging from 8% to 9% a year. Fortunately, by 1952 inflation subsided. 1954 and 1955 flirted with deflation again but the remainder of the decade had moderate inflation ranging from 1% to 3.7%. The average annual inflation for the entire decade was only 2.04%.
Technology.
Technology.
Television, which first reached the marketplace in the 1940s, attained maturity during the 50s and by the end of the decade, most American households owned a TV set. A rush to produce larger screens than the tiny ones found on 40s models occurred during 1950-52. In 1954 RCA intro
Bell Telephone Labs]] produced the first Solar battery. In 1954 you could get a yard of contact paper for only 59 cents. Polypropylene was invented in 1954. In 1955 Jonas Salk invented a polio vaccine which was given to more than seven million American students. In 1956 a solar powered wrist watch was invented.
A surprise came in 1957; a 184 lb satellite named Sputnik 1 was launched by the Soviets. The space race began 4 months later as the United States launched a smaller satellite. In 1958 the first plastic Coke bottle appeared.
Popular culture.
Music.
Popular music in the early 1950s was essentially a continuation of the crooner sound of the previous decade, with less emphasis on the jazz-influenced big band style and more emphasis on a conservative, operatic, symphonic style of music. Frank Sinatra, Tony Bennett, Frankie Laine, Patti Page, Judy Garland, Johnnie Ray, Kay Starr, Perry Como, Bing Crosby, Rosemary Clooney, Dean Martin, Georgia Gibbs, Eddie Fisher, Teresa Brewer, Dinah Shore, Kitty Kallen, Joni James, Peggy Lee, Julie London, Toni Arden, June Valli, Doris Day, Arthur Godfrey, Tennessee Ernie Ford, Guy Mitchell, Nat King Cole, and vocal groups like The Mills Brothers, The Ink Spots, The Four Lads, The Four Aces, The Chordettes, Fontane Sisters, The Hilltoppers and The Ames Brothers. Jo Stafford's "You Belong To Me" was the #1 song of 1952 on the Billboard Top 100 chart.
The middle of the decade saw a sudden, volcanic change in the popular music landscape as classic pop was swept off the charts by rock-and-roll. Crooners such as Eddie Fisher, Perry Como, and Patti Page, who had dominated the first half of the decade, found their access to the pop charts significantly curtailed by the decade's end.
Doo Wop entered the pop charts in the 1950s. Its popularity soon spawns the parody "Who Put the Bomp."
Rock-n-Roll emerged in the mid-50s with Sam Cooke, Jackie Wilson, Gene Vincent, Chuck Berry, Fats Domino, Little Richard, James Brown, Bo Diddley, Buddy Holly, Bobby Darin, Ritchie Valens, Duane Eddy, Eddie Cochran, Brenda Lee, Bobby Vee, Connie Frances, Johnny Mathis, Neil Sedaka, Pat Boone and Ricky Nelson being notable exponents. In the mid-1950s, Elvis Presley became the leading figure of the newly popular sound of rock and roll with a series of network television appearances and chart-topping records. Chuck Berry, with "Maybellene" (1955), "Roll over Beethoven" (1956), "Rock and Roll Music" (1957) and "Johnny B. Goode" (1958), refined and developed the major elements that made rock and roll distinctive, focusing on teen life and introducing guitar solos and showmanship that would be a major influence on subsequent rock music. Bill Haley, Jerry Lee Lewis, the Everly Brothers, Carl Perkins, Johnny Cash, Conway Twitty, Johnny Horton, and Marty Robbins were Rockabilly musicians. Doo Wop was another popular genre at the time. Popular Doo Wop and Rock-n-Roll bands of the mid to late 1950s include The Platters, The Flamingos, The Dells, The Silhouettes, Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers, Little Anthony & The Imperials, Danny and the Juniors, The Coasters, The Drifters, The Del-Vikings and Dion and the Belmonts.
The new music differed from previous styles in that it was primarily targeted at the teenager market, which became a distinct entity for the first time in the 1950s as growing prosperity meant that young people did not have to grow up as quickly or be expected to support a family. Rock-and-roll proved to be a difficult phenomenon for older Americans to accept and there were widespread accusations of it being a communist-orchestrated scheme to corrupt the youth, although rock and roll was extremely market based and capitalistic.
Jazz stars in the 1950s who came into prominence in their genres called Bebop, Hard bop, Cool jazz and the Blues, at this time included Lester Young, Ben Webster, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Thelonious Monk, Charles Mingus, Art Tatum, Bill Evans, Ahmad Jamal, Oscar Peterson, Gil Evans, Jerry Mulligan, Cannonball Adderley, Stan Getz, Chet Baker, Dave Brubeck, Art Blakey, Max Roach, the Miles Davis Quintet, the Modern Jazz Quartet, Ella Fitzgerald, Ray Charles, Sarah Vaughn, Dinah Washington, Nina Simone, and Billie Holiday.
The American folk music revival became a phenomenon in the United States in the 1950s to mid-1960s with the initial success of the Weavers who popularized the genre. Their sound, and their broad repertoire of traditional folk material and topical songs inspired other groups such as the Kingston Trio, the Chad Mitchell Trio, The New Christy Minstrels, and the "collegiate folk" groups such as The Brothers Four, The Four Freshmen, The Four Preps, and The Highwaymen. All featured tight vocal harmonies and a repertoire at least initially rooted in folk music and topical songs.
On 3 February 1959, a chartered plane transporting the three American rock and roll musicians Buddy Holly, Ritchie Valens and J. P. "The Big Bopper" Richardson goes down in foggy conditions near Clear Lake, Iowa, killing all four occupants on board, including pilot Roger Peterson. The tragedy is later termed "The Day the Music Died", popularized in Don McLean's 1972 song "American Pie". This event, combined with the conscription of Elvis into the US Army, is often taken to mark the point where the era of 50s rock-and-roll ended.
Film.
European cinema experienced a renaissance in the '50s following the deprivations of World War II. Italian director Federico Fellini won the first foreign language film Academy Award with "La strada" and garnered another Academy Award with "Nights of Cabiria". In 1955, Swedish director Ingmar Bergman earned a Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival with "Smiles of a Summer Night" and followed the film with masterpieces "The Seventh Seal" and "Wild Strawberries". Jean Cocteau's "Orphée", a film central to his Orphic Trilogy, starred Jean Marais and was released in 1950. French director Claude Chabrol's "Le Beau Serge" is now widely considered the first film of the French New Wave. Notable European film stars of the period include Brigitte Bardot, Sophia Loren, Marcello Mastroianni, Max von Sydow, and Jean-Paul Belmondo.
Japanese cinema reached its zenith with films from director Akira Kurosawa including "Rashomon", "Ikiru", "Seven Samurai", "Throne of Blood", and "The Hidden Fortress". Other distinguished Japanese directors of the period were Yasujiro Ozu and Kenji Mizoguchi. Russian fantasy director Aleksandr Ptushko's mythological epics "Sadko", "Ilya Muromets", and "Sampo" were internationally acclaimed as was "Ballad of a Soldier", a 1959 Soviet film directed by Grigori Chukhrai
In Hollywood, the epic "Ben-Hur" grabbed a record 11 Academy Awards in 1959 and its success gave a new lease of life to Hollywood studio MGM.
The "Golden Era" of 3-D cinematography transpired during the 1950s.
Television.
The 1950s are known as The Golden Age of Television by some people. Sales of TV sets rose tremendously in the 1950s and by 1950 4.4 million families in America had a television set. Americans devoted most of their free time to watching television broadcasts. People spent so much time watching TV, that movie attendance dropped and so did the number of radio listeners. Television revolutionized the way Americans see themselves and the world around them. TV affects all aspects of American culture. "Television affects what we wear, the music we listen to, what we eat, and the news we receive."
Art movements.
In the early 1950s Abstract expressionism and artists Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning were enormously influential. However by the late 1950s Color Field painting and Barnett Newman and Mark Rothko's paintings became more in focus to the next generation.
Pop Art used the iconography of television, photography, comics, cinema and advertising. With its roots in dadaism, it started to take form towards the end of the 1950s when some European artists started to make the symbols and products of the world of advertising and propaganda the main subject of their artistic work. This return of figurative art, in opposition to the abstract expressionism that dominated the aesthetic scene since the end of World War II was dominated by Great Britain until the early 1960s when Andy Warhol, the most known artist of this movement began to show Pop Art in galleries in the United States.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1950 • 1951 • 1952 • 1953 • 1954 • 1955 • 1956 • 1957 • 1958 • 1959

</doc>
<doc id="34574" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34574" title="1870s">
1870s

The 1870s continued the trends of the previous decade, as new empires, imperialism and militarism rose in Europe and Asia. The United States was recovering from the American Civil War. Germany unified in 1871 and began its Second Reich. Labor unions and strikes occurred worldwide in the later part of the decade, and continued until World War I. The Reconstruction era of the United States brought a legacy of bitterness and segregation that lasted until the 1960s.

</doc>
<doc id="34575" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34575" title="1952">
1952

1952 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34578" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34578" title="1984">
1984

1984 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34579" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34579" title="2000s (decade)">
2000s (decade)

The 2000s (pronounced "two-thousands") was a decade of the Gregorian calendar that began on January 1, 2000, and ended on December 31, 2009.
The growth of the Internet contributed to globalization during the decade, because it allowed communication among those around the world.
The economic growth of the 2000s had considerable environmental consequences, raised demand for diminishing energy resources, and was still shown to be vulnerable as demonstrated during the Global Financial Crisis of the late 2000s.
Names for the decade.
In the English-speaking world, a name for the decade was never universally accepted in the same manner as for decades such as the '80s, the '90s, etc.
Orthographically, the decade can be written as the "2000s" or the "'00s". Some people read "2000s" as "two-thousands", and thus simply refer to the decade as the "Two-Thousands", the "Twenty Hundreds", or the "Twenty-ohs". Some read it as the "00s" (pronounced "Ohs", "Oh Ohs", "Double Ohs" or "Ooze"), while others referred to it as the "Zeros". On January 1, 2000, the BBC listed the noughties (derived from "nought" a word used for zero in many English-speaking countries), as a potential moniker for the new decade. This has become a common name for the decade in the UK and Australia, as well as other Anglospheric countries.
Others have advocated the term "the aughts", a term widely used at the beginning of the 20th century for its first decade. The American Dialect Society holds a lighthearted annual poll for word of the year and related subcategories. For 2009, the winner in the "least likely to succeed" category was "Any name of the decade 2000–2009, such as: Noughties, Aughties, Oughties, etc."
When the "20-" is dropped, the individual years within the decade are usually referred to as starting with an "oh", such as "oh-seven" to refer to the year 2007. The option "aught-seven", for whatever reason, has never caught on idiomatically. When the "20-" is retained, two options are available in speech, both of which have idiomatic currency: "two thousand seven" in American English ("two thousand and seven" in the UK) or "twenty-oh-seven". During the 2000s decade, it was more common to hear the first pattern than the second. For example, the September 11 attacks were much more commonly spoken of as occurring in "two thousand (and) one" than in "twenty-oh-one", although the latter was not unidiomatic. During the 2010s, people grew used to hearing the "twenty-" prefix in speech more often. Under this influence, it became a bit more common to refer to the individual years of the aughts decade as "twenty-oh-seven" or "twenty-oh-eight" than it had been during the 2000s, although the "two thousand seven" pattern is still dominant.
Politics and wars.
The War on Terror and War in Afghanistan began after the September 11 attacks in 2001. The International Criminal Court was formed in 2002. A United States-led coalition invaded Iraq, and the Iraq War led to the end of Saddam Hussein's rule as Iraqi President and the Ba'ath Party in Iraq. Al-Qaeda and affiliated Islamist militant groups performed terrorist acts throughout the decade. These acts included the 2004 Madrid train bombings, 7/7 London bombings in 2005, and the Mumbai attacks related to al-Qaeda in 2008. The European Union expanded its sanctions amid Iran's failure to comply with its transparency obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and United Nations resolutions.
The War on Terror generated extreme controversy around the world, with questions regarding the justification for U.S. actions leading to a loss of support for the American government, both in and outside the United States. Additional armed conflict occurred in the Middle East, including between Israel and Hezbollah, then with Israel and Hamas. The greatest loss of life due to natural disaster came from the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, which caused a tsunami that killed around one quarter-million people and displaced well over a million others. Cooperative international rescue missions by many countries from around the world helped in efforts by the most affected nations to rebuild and recover from the devastation. An enormous loss of life and property value came in 2005, when Hurricane Katrina flooded nearly the entire city of New Orleans. The resulting political fallout was severely damaging to the George W. Bush administration because of its perceived failure to act promptly and effectively. In 2008, Barack Obama was elected President of the United States and became the first African-American U.S. president when he succeeded Bush in 2009.
Terrorist Attacks.
The most prominent terrorist attacks committed against civilian population during the decade include:
Wars.
The most prominent armed conflicts of the decade include:
Coups.
 The most prominent coups d'état of the decade include:
Democracy.
During this decade, the peaceful transfer of power through elections first occurred in Mexico, Indonesia, Taiwan, Colombia, and several other countries. (See below.)
Political events.
The prominent political events of the decade include:
Americas
Asia
Europe
Assassinations.
The prominent assassinations of the decade included:
Disasters.
Natural disasters.
The 2000s experienced some of the worst and most destructive natural disasters in history.
Epidemics.
Antibiotic resistance is a serious and growing phenomenon in contemporary medicine and has emerged as one of the eminent public health concerns of the 21st century, particularly as it pertains to pathogenic organisms (the term is not especially relevant to organisms which don't cause disease in humans).
The outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the United Kingdom in 2001 caused a crisis in British agriculture and tourism. This epizootic saw 2,000 cases of the disease in farms across most of the British countryside. Over 10 million sheep and cattle were killed.
Between November 2002 and July 2003, an outbreak of Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) occurred in Hong Kong, with 8,273 cases and 775 deaths worldwide (9.6% fatality) according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Within weeks, SARS spread from Hong Kong to infect individuals in 37 countries in early 2003.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: the Office for National Statistics reported 1,629 MRSA-related deaths in England and Wales during 2005, indicating a MRSA-related mortality rate half the rate of that in the United States for 2005, even though the figures from the British source were explained to be high because of "improved levels of reporting, possibly brought about by the continued high public profile of the disease" during the time of the 2005 United Kingdom General Election. MRSA is thought to have caused 1,652 deaths in 2006 in UK up from 51 in 1993.
The 2009 H1N1 (swine flu) flu pandemic is also considered a natural disaster. On October 25, 2009 U.S. President Barack Obama officially declared H1N1 a national emergency Despite President Obama's concern, a Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll found in October 2009 that an overwhelming majority of New Jerseyans (74%) were not very worried or not at all worried about contracting the H1N1 flu virus.
A study conducted in coordination with the University of Michigan Health Service is scheduled for publication in the December 2009 "American Journal of Roentgenology" warning that H1N1 flu can cause pulmonary embolism, surmised as a leading cause of death in this current pandemic. The study authors suggest physician evaluation via contrast enhanced CT scans for the presence of pulmonary emboli when caring for patients diagnosed with respiratory complications from a "severe" case of the H1N1 flu.
March 21, 2010 worldwide update by the U.N.'s World Health Organization (WHO) states that "213 countries and overseas territories/communities have reported laboratory confirmed cases of pandemic influenza H1N1 2009, including at least 16,931 deaths."
As of May 30, 2010 worldwide update by World Health Organization(WHO) more than 214 countries and overseas territories or communities have reported laboratory confirmed cases of pandemic influenza H1N1 2009, including over 18,138 deaths.
Footnote:
The Walkerton Tragedy is a series of events that accompanied the contamination of the water supply of Walkerton, Ontario, Canada, by E. coli bacteria in May 2000.
Starting May 11, 2000, many residents of the community of about 5,000 people began to simultaneously experience bloody diarrhea, gastrointestinal infections and other symptoms of E. coli infection.
Seven people died directly from drinking the E. coli contaminated water, who might have been saved if the Walkerton Public Utilities Commission had admitted to contaminated water sooner, and about 2,500 became ill.
In 2001 a similar outbreak in North Battleford, Saskatchewan caused by the protozoan Cryptosporidium affected at least 5,800 people.
Non-natural disasters.
Stampedes.
At least 29 human stampedes occurred in the 2000s.
The 2005 Baghdad bridge stampede occurred on August 31, 2005 when 953 people died following a stampede on Al-Aaimmah bridge, which crosses the Tigris river in the Iraqi capital of Baghdad.
Economics.
The most significant evolution of the early 2000s in the economic landscape was the long-time predicted breakthrough of economic giant China, which had double-digit growth during nearly the whole decade. To a lesser extent, India also benefited from an economic boom which saw the two most populous countries becoming an increasingly dominant economic force. The rapid catching-up of emerging economies with developed countries sparked some protectionist tensions during the period and was partly responsible for an increase in energy and food prices at the end of the decade. The economic developments in the latter third of the decade were dominated by a worldwide economic downturn, which started with the crisis in housing and credit in the United States in late 2007, and led to the bankruptcy of major banks and other financial institutions. The outbreak of this global financial crisis sparked a global recession, beginning in the United States and affecting most of the industrialized world.
The period takes its name from Gordon Brown, the then UK Chancellor of the Exchequer (who later became Prime Minister), who decided to sell approximately half of the UK's gold reserves in a series of auctions. At the time, the UK's gold reserves were worth about US$6.5 billion, accounting for about half of the UK's US$13 billion foreign currency net reserves.
Economic growth in the world.
Between 1999 to 2009, according to the World Bank statistics for GDP:
Globalization and its discontents.
The removal of trade and investment barriers, the growth of domestic markets, artificially low currencies, the proliferation of education, the rapid development of high tech and information systems industries and the growth of the world economy lead to a significant growth of offshore outsourcing during the decade as many multinational corporations significantly increased subcontracting of manufacturing (and increasingly, services) across national boundaries in developing countries and particularly in China and India, due to many benefits and mainly because the two countries which are the two most populous countries in the world provide huge pools from which to find talent and as because both countries are low cost sourcing countries. As a result of this growth, many of these developing countries accumulated capital and started investing abroad. Other countries, including the United Arab Emirates, Australia, Brazil and Russia, benefited from increased demand for their mineral and energy resources that global growth generated. The hollowing out of manufacturing was felt in Japan and parts of the United States and Europe which had not been able to develop successful innovative industries. Opponents point out that the practice of offshore outsourcing by countries with higher wages leads to the reduction of their own domestic employment and domestic investment. As a result, many customer service jobs as well as jobs in the information technology sectors (data processing, computer programming, and technical support) in countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom have been or are potentially affected.
While global trade rose in the decade (partially driven by China's entry into the WTO in 2001), there was little progress in the multilateral trading system. International trade continued to expand during the decade as emerging economies and developing countries, in particular China and South-Asian countries, benefited low wages costs and most often undervalued currencies. However, global negotiations to reduce tariffs did not make any progress, as member countries of the World Trade Organization did not succeed in finding agreements to stretch the extent of free trade. The Doha Round of negotiations, launched in 2001 by the WTO to promote development, failed to be completed because of growing tensions between regional areas. Nor did the Cancún Conference in 2003 find a consensus on services trade and agricultural subsidies.
The comparative rise of China, India, and other developing countries also contributed to their growing clout in international fora. In 2009, it was determined that the G20, originally a forum of finance ministers and central bank governors, would replace the G8 as the main economic council.
2007 Chinese export recalls
In 2007 a series of product recalls and import bans were imposed by the product safety institutions of the United States, Canada, the European Union, Australia and New Zealand against products manufactured in and exported from the mainland of the People's Republic of China (PRC) because of numerous alleged consumer safety issues.
Events in the confidence crisis included recalls on consumer goods such as pet food, toys, toothpaste, lipstick, and a ban on certain types of seafood. Also included are reports on the poor crash safety of Chinese automobiles, slated to enter the American and European markets in 2008. This created adverse consequences for the confidence in the safety and quality of mainland Chinese manufactured goods in the global economy.
The age of turbulence.
The decade was marked by two financial and economic crises. In 2000, the Dot-com bubble burst, causing turmoil in financial markets and a decline in economic activity in the developed economies, in particular in the United States. However, the impact of the crisis on the activity was limited thanks to the intervention of the central banks, notably the U.S. Federal Reserve System. Indeed, Alan Greenspan, leader of the Federal Reserve until 2006, cut the interest rates several times to avoid a severe recession, allowing an economic revival in the U.S.
As the Federal Reserve maintained low interest rates to favor economic growth, a housing bubble began to appear in the United States. In 2007, the rise in interest rates and the collapse of the housing market caused a wave of loan payment failures in the U.S. The subsequent mortgage crisis caused a global financial crisis, because the subprime mortgages had been securitized and sold to international banks and investment funds. Despite the extensive intervention of central banks, including partial and total nationalization of major European banks, the crisis of sovereign debt became particularly acute, first in Iceland, though as events of the early 2010s would show, it was not an isolated European example. Economic activity was severely affected around the world in 2008 and 2009, with disastrous consequences for carmakers.
In 2007, the UK's Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown, delivered his final Mansion House speech as Chancellor before he moved into Number 10. Addressing financiers: "A new world order has been created", Everyone needed to follow the City's "great example", "an era that history will record as the beginning of a new Golden Age".
Reactions of governments in all developed and developing countries against the economic slowdown were largely inspired by keynesian economics. The end of the decade was characterized by a Keynesian resurgence, while the influence and media popularity of left-wing economists Joseph Stiglitz and Paul Krugman (Nobel Prize recipients in 2001 and 2008, respectively) did not stop growing during the decade. Several international summits were organized to find solutions against the economic crisis and to impose greater control on the financial markets. The G-20 became in 2008 and 2009 a major organization, as leaders of the member countries held two major summits in Washington in November 2008 and in London in April 2009 to regulate the banking and financial sectors, and also succeeding in coordinating their economic action and in avoiding protectionist reactions.
Energy crisis.
From the mid-1980s to September 2003, the inflation-adjusted price of a barrel of crude oil on NYMEX was generally under $25/barrel. During 2003, the price rose above $30, reached $60 by August 11, 2005, and peaked at $147.30 in July 2008. Commentators attributed these price increases to many factors, including reports from the United States Department of Energy and others showing a decline in petroleum reserves, worries over peak oil, Middle East tension, and oil price speculation.
For a time, geopolitical events and natural disasters indirectly related to the global oil market had strong short-term effects on oil prices. These events and disasters included North Korean missile tests, the 2006 conflict between Israel and Lebanon, worries over Iranian nuclear plants in 2006 and Hurricane Katrina. By 2008, such pressures appeared to have an insignificant impact on oil prices given the onset of the global recession. The recession caused demand for energy to shrink in late 2008 and early 2009 and the price plunged as well. However, it surged back in May 2009, bringing it back to November 2008 levels.
Many fast-growing economies throughout the world, especially in Asia, also were a major factor in the rapidly increasing demand for fossil fuels, which—along with fewer new petroleum finds, greater extraction costs, and political turmoil—forced two other trends: a soar in the price of petroleum products and a push by governments and businesses to promote the development of environmentally friendly technology (known informally as "green" technology). However, a side-effect of the push by some industrial nations to "go green" and utilize biofuels was a decrease in the supply of food and a subsequent increase in the price of the same. It partially caused the 2007 food price crisis, which seriously affected the world's poorer nations with an even more severe shortage of food.
The rise of the euro.
A common currency for most E.U.member states, the euro, was established electronically in 1999, officially tying all the currencies of each participating nation to each other. The new currency was put into circulation in 2002 and the old currencies were phased out. Only three countries of the then 15 member states decided not to join the euro (The United Kingdom, Denmark and Sweden). In 2004 the E.U.undertook a major eastward enlargement, admitting 10 new member states (eight of which were former communist states). Two more, Bulgaria and Romania, joined in 2007, establishing a union of 27 nations.
The euro has since become the second largest reserve currency and the second most traded currency in the world after the US$.
s of 2009[ [update]], with more than €790 billion in circulation, the euro was the currency with the highest combined value of banknotes and coins in circulation in the world, having surpassed the US$.
Science and technology.
Technology.
Computing and Internet.
In the 2000s, the Internet became a mainstay, strengthening its grip on Western society while becoming increasingly available in the developing world.
Other.
In late 2004 and early 2005, came a significant increase in reported incidents linked to laser pointers - see Lasers and aviation safety. The wave of incidents may have been triggered in part by "copycats" who read press accounts of laser pointer incidents. In one case, David Banach of New Jersey was charged under federal Patriot Act anti-terrorism laws, after he allegedly shone a laser pointer at aircraft.
Chip and PIN was trialled in Northampton, England from May 2003, and as a result was rolled out nationwide in the United Kingdom in 2004 with advertisements in the press and national television touting the "Safety in Numbers" slogan.
ATM crime in Europe jumped to €485m (£423m) in 2008 following a 149% rise in attacks on cash machines. Gangs are turning to Bluetooth wireless technology to transmit card and personal identification number (PIN) details to nearby laptops and using increasingly sophisticated techniques to skim cards.
More conventional smash-and-grab attacks are also on the rise, says Enisa, the European Network and Information Security Agency. It reports a 32% rise in physical attacks on ATMs, ranging from ram raids to the use of rotary saws, blowtorches and diamond drills. It blames the increase on gangs from eastern Europe.
Religion and Irreligion.
"New Atheism" is the name given to the ideas promoted by a collection of modern atheist writers who have advocated the view that "religion should not simply be tolerated but should be countered, criticized, and exposed by rational argument wherever its influence arises."
The term is commonly associated with individuals such as Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Sam Harris, and Christopher Hitchens (together called "the Four Horsemen of New Atheism" in a taped 2007 discussion they held on their criticisms of religion, a name that has stuck), along with Victor J. Stenger, Lawrence M. Krauss and A.C. Grayling. Several best-selling books by these authors, published between 2004 and 2007, form the basis for much of the discussion of New Atheism.
Several groups promoting no religious faith or opposing religious faith altogether – including the Freedom From Religion Foundation, American Atheists, Camp Quest, and the Rational Response Squad – have witnessed large increases in membership numbers in recent years, and the number of secularist student organizations at American colleges and universities increased during the 2000s.
David Bario of the Columbia News Service wrote:
Under the Bush administration, organizations that promote abstinence and encourage teens to sign virginity pledges or wear purity rings have received federal grants. The Silver Ring Thing, a subsidiary of a Pennsylvania evangelical church, has received more than $1 million from the government to promote abstinence and to sell its rings in the United States and abroad.
Environment and climate change.
Climate change and global warming became household words in the 2000s. Predictions tools made significant progress during the decade, UN-sponsored organisations such as the IPCC gained influence, and studies such as the Stern report influenced public support for paying the political and economic costs of countering climate change.
The global temperature kept climbing during the decade. In December 2009, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced that the 2000s may have been the warmest decade since records began in 1850, with four of the five warmest years since 1850 having occurred in this decade. The WMO's findings were later echoed by the NASA and the NOAA.
 Major natural disasters became more frequent and helped change public opinion. One of the deadliest heat waves in human history happened during the 2000s, mostly in Europe, with the 2003 European heat wave killing 37,451 people over the summer months. In February 2009, a series of highly destructive bushfires started in Victoria, Australia, lasting into the next month. While the fires are believed to have been caused by arson, they were widely reported as having been fueled by an excessive heatwave that was due in part to climate change. It has also been alleged that climate change was a cause of increased storms intensity, notably in the case of Hurricane Katrina.
International actions.
Climate change became a major issue for governments, populations and scientists. Debates on global warming and its causes made significant progress, as climate change denials were refuted by most scientific studies. Decisive reports such as the Stern Review and the 2007 IPCC Report almost established a climate change consensus. NGOs' actions and the commitment of political personalities (such as former U.S. Vice President Al Gore) also urged to international reactions against climate change. Documentary films "An Inconvenient Truth" and "Home" may have had a decisive impact.
Under the auspices of The UN Convention on Climate Change the Kyoto Protocol (aimed at combating global warming) entered into force on February 16, 2005. As of November 2009, 187 states have signed and ratified the protocol. In addition The UN Convention on Climate Change helped coordinate the efforts of the international community to fight potentially disastrous effects of human activity on the planet and launched negotiations to set an ambitious program of carbon emission reduction that began in 2007 with the Bali Road Map. However, the representatives of the then 192 member countries of the United Nations gathered in December 2009 for the Copenhagen Conference failed to reach a binding agreement to reduce carbon emissions because of divisions between regional areas.
However, as environmental technologies were to make up a potential market, some countries made large investments in renewable energies, energy conservation and sustainable transport. Many governments launched national plans to promote sustainable energy. In 2003, the European Union members created an emission trading scheme, and in 2007 they assembled a climate and energy package to reduce further their carbon emission and improve their energy-efficiency. In 2009, the United States Obama administration set up the Green New Deal, a plan to create millions of jobs in sectors related to environmentalism.
The Household Waste Recycling Act 2003 requires local authorities in England to provide every household with a separate collection of at least two types of recyclable materials by 2010.
Architecture.
Commercialization and globalization resulted in mass migration of people from rural areas to urban areas resulting in high profile skyscrapers in Asia and Europe. In Asia skyscrapers were constructed in India, China, Thailand, South Korea, and Japan.
Popular culture.
Film.
Usage of computer-generated imagery became more widespread in films during the 2000s. Documentary and mockumentary films, such as "March of the Penguins" and "Super Size Me", were popular in the 2000s. 2004's Fahrenheit 9/11 by Michael Moore is the highest grossing documentary of all time.
Online films become popular, and conversion to digital cinema started, but was not finished. This conversion is still continuing into the 2010s.
December 2009's "Avatar" is an American epic science fiction film written and directed by James Cameron. It made extensive use of cutting edge motion capture filming techniques, and was released for traditional viewing, 3D viewing (using the RealD 3D, Dolby 3D, XpanD 3D, and IMAX 3D formats), and for "4D" experiences in select South Korean theaters. The stereoscopic filmmaking was touted as a breakthrough in cinematic technology.
3D films became more and more successful throughout the 2000s, culminating in the unprecedented success of 3D presentations of Avatar.
"formerly reliable critics who seem to have gone remarkably soft – not to say softhearted and sometimes softheaded – in their old age."
In July 2005, it was reported that the Scottish actor and producer Sir Sean Connery had decided to retire, due to disillusionment with the "idiots now in Hollywood"' Telling the New Zealand Herald: "I'm fed up with the idiots... the ever-widening gap between people who know how to make movies and the people who greenlight the movies."
"" is a 2003 epic fantasy-drama film directed by Peter Jackson based on the second and third volumes of J. R. R. Tolkien's "The Lord of the Rings". It was nominated for eleven Academy Awards and won all the categories for which it was nominated. The film is tied for largest number of awards won with "Ben-Hur" (1959) and "Titanic" (1997).
"" is a 2007 American adventure fantasy swashbuckler, the third film in the Pirates of the Caribbean series, and was the most expensive film ever made, with a budget of 300 million US dollars.
"The Passion of the Christ" is a 2004 American film directed by Mel Gibson and starring Jim Caviezel as Jesus Christ. The film has been highly controversial and received mixed reviews; however, it was a major commercial hit, grossing in excess of $600 million during its theatrical release, becoming the highest grossing R-rated film of all time.
The superhero film genre experienced renewed and intense interest throughout the 2000s. With high ticket and DVD sales, several new superhero films were released every year. The "X-Men", "Batman" and "Spider-Man" series were particularly prominent, and other notable films in the genre included "Daredevil" (2003), "The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen" (2003), "Hulk" (2003), "Hellboy" (2004), "Fantastic Four" (2005), "Iron Man" (2008), "The Incredible Hulk" (2008), and "Watchmen" (2009). Some media commentators attributed the increased popularity of such franchises to the social and political climate in Western society since the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, although others argued advances in special effects technology played a more significant role.
For five years, between 2004's "Home on the Range" and 2009's "The Princess and the Frog" animated, musical, comedy films; Walt Disney Animation Studios stopped their production of traditional 2D animated films.
Oscar winners
"Gladiator" (2000), "A Beautiful Mind" (2001), "Chicago" (2002), "" (2003), "Million Dollar Baby" (2004), "Crash" (2005), "The Departed" (2006), "No Country for Old Men" (2007), "Slumdog Millionaire" (2008), "The Hurt Locker" (2009)
The 20 highest-grossing films of the decade are (in order from highest to lowest grossing)
"Avatar", ', ', "The Dark Knight", "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone", ', "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix", "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince", ', "Shrek 2", "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire", "Spider-Man 3", ', "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets", ', "Finding Nemo", ', ', "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban" and "Shrek the Third".
The top 15 highest-grossing film series of the decade are (in order from highest to lowest grossing)
"Harry Potter" film series, "The Lord of the Rings" film trilogy, "Pirates of the Caribbean"-film series, "Spider-Man"-film series, "Shrek"-film series, "Ice Age"-film series, "Transformers"-film series, "X-Men"-film series, "Batman"-film series' "Batman Begins" and "The Dark Knight", "Star Wars" "Attack of the Clones" and "Revenge of the Sith", "The Da Vinci Code" and "Angels & Demons", "The Matrix"-film series' "The Matrix Reloaded" and "Matrix Revolutions", "The Chronicles of Narnia"-film series, ""-film series' and "The Mummy"-film series.
Music.
The Internet allowed unprecedented access to music and allowed artists to distribute music freely without label backing. Innumerable online outlets and sheer volume of music has resulted in a culture of many niches and no center, a process begun at the mainstream level with the rise of alternative rock in the 1990s. It also offers musicians a plethora of musical influences to draw from.
By the 2000s, Hip hop reached its commercial peaks, inspired various subsets of culture, and the genre continued to dominate the music scene of the decade as the best-selling artist of the decade was the American rapper Eminem, who sold 32 million albums. Other popular hip hop artists throughout the 2000s consist of Jay-Z, Nas, Kanye West, OutKast, Cam'ron, Pharrell, Snoop Dogg, 50 Cent, Nelly, The Game, and more. The genre was extremely diverse stylistically ranging everywhere genre wise from Gangsta rap to Hyphy and a multitude of Hip Hop albums received widespread critical acclaim.
"Billboard" magazine named Eminem as the artist with the best performance on the Billboard charts and named Beyoncé as the female artist of the decade. In the UK, the biggest selling artist of the decade is Robbie Williams* and the biggest selling band of the decade is Westlife. The American recording artist Michael Jackson died on June 25, 2009, creating the largest public mourning since the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. On August 25, 2001, Aaliyah Haughton - an American recording artist, dancer, actress and model and eight others, were killed in an airplane crash in The Bahamas after filming the music video for the single "Rock the Boat". On April 25, 2002, Lisa Lopes an American: rapper, dancer, and singer-songwriter, best known as a member of the R&B/hip-hop girl group TLC by her stage name Left Eye, was killed in a car crash in La Ceiba, Honduras. On October 30, 2002, Jason William Mizell (Jam Master Jay) from the Run-D.M.C hiphop group, was shot and killed in a Merrick Boulevard recording studio in Jamaica, Queens. Innovator, inventor, performer and guitar virtuoso Les Paul also died on August 12, 2009 at the age of 94.
In Alternative rock, the so-called garage rock or Post-punk revival saw commercial success with The Strokes, Interpol, The Killers, Arctic Monkeys and The White Stripes having mainstream success.
The late 2000s displayed a new trend in music, Auto-Tune. In the early 2000s, autotune had been common with artists such as *NSYNC and Eiffel 65. The decade also brought in more dance and electronic music toward the end of the decade and even less rock music in the mainstream. Hip hop music also saw a decline in the mainstream during the late 2000s because of electronic music's rising popularity.
According to "The Guardian", music styles during the 2000s changed very little from how they were at last half of the 1990s. The 2000s had a profound impact on the condition of music distribution. Recent advents in digital technology have fundamentally altered industry and marketing practices as well as players in unusual rapidity. According to Nielsen Soundscan, by 2009 CDs accounted for 79 percent of album sales, with 20 percent coming from digital, representing both a 10 percent drop and gain for both formats in 2 years.
Grime is a style of music that emerged from Bow, East London, England in the early 2000s, primarily as a development of UK garage, drum & bass, hip hop and dancehall. Pioneers of the style include English rappers Dizzee Rascal, Wiley, Roll Deep and Skepta.
The Invincible (Michael Jackson album), released in October 30, 2001, and costing $30m, was the most expensive ever made.
In July 2002, the release of English musician George Michael's song "Shoot the Dog" proved to be controversial. It was critical of George W. Bush and Tony Blair in the lead up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The video showed a cartoon version of Michael astride a nuclear missile in the Middle East and Tony and Cherie Blair in bed with President Bush.
The Dixie Chicks are an American country music band. During a London concert ten days before the 2003 invasion of Iraq, lead vocalist Maines said, "we don't want this war, this violence, and we're ashamed that the President of the United States [George W. Bush] is from Texas". The positive reaction to this statement from the British audience contrasted with the boycotts that ensued in the U.S., where "the band was assaulted by talk-show conservatives", while their albums were discarded in public protest.
The original music video for the title song from American pop singer Madonna's American Life album, was canceled as Madonna thought that the video, featuring violence and war imagery, would be deemed unpatriotic since America was then at war with Iraq.
Live 8 was a string of benefit concerts that took place on 2 July 2005, in the G8 states and in South Africa. They were timed to precede the G8 conference and summit held at the Gleneagles Hotel in Auchterarder, Scotland from 6–8 July 2005; they also coincided with the 20th anniversary of Live Aid. Run in support of the aims of the UK's Make Poverty History campaign and the Global Call for Action Against Poverty, ten simultaneous concerts were held on 2 July and one on 6 July. On 7 July, the G8 leaders pledged to double 2004 levels of aid to poor nations from US$25 billion to US$50 billion by the year 2010. Half of the money was to go to Africa.
More than 1,000 musicians performed at the concerts, which were broadcast on 182 television networks and 2,000 radio networks.
Joyce Hatto (5 September 1928 – 29 June 2006) was a British concert pianist and piano teacher. Married in 1956 to William Barrington-Coupe, a British record producer convicted of fraud in 1966, Hatto became famous very late in life when unauthorised copies of commercial recordings made by other pianists were released under her name, earning her high praise from critics. The fraud did not come to light until a few months after her death.
By November 2006, the Rolling Stones English rock band's A Bigger Bang tour, had been declared the highest-grossing tour of all time, earning $437 million.
In December 2009, a campaign was launched on Facebook by Jon and Tracy Morter, from South Woodham Ferrers, which generated publicity in the UK and took the 1992 Rage Against The Machine track "Killing in the Name" to the Christmas Number One slot in the UK Singles Chart, which had been occupied the four consecutive years from 2005 by winners from the TV show The X Factor.
Rage's Zack de la Rocha spoke to BBC1 upon hearing the news, stating that:
"...We want to thank everyone that participated in this incredible, organic, grass-roots campaign. It says more about the spontaneous action taken by young people throughout the UK to topple this very sterile pop monopoly."
A chiptune (also known as chip music or 8-bit music) is synthesized electronic music often produced with the sound chips of vintage computers, video game consoles, and arcade machines, as well as with other methods such as emulation.
While it has been a mostly underground genre, chiptune has had periods of moderate popularity in the 1980s and 21st century, and has influenced the development of electronic dance music.
During the late 2000s, a new wave of chiptune culture took place, boosted by the release of software such as LittleSoundDJ for the Game Boy. This new culture has much more emphasis on live performances and record releases than the demoscene and tracker culture, of which the new artists are often only distantly aware.
Reunions.
Duran Duran are an English new wave band, formed in Birmingham in 1978. The original five members reunited in the early 2000s.
On February 23, 2003, Simon and Garfunkel reunited to perform in public for the first time in a decade, singing "The Sound of Silence" as the opening act of the Grammy Awards.
On 9 May 2006, British five-piece vocal pop Take That returned to the recorded music scene after more than ten years of absence, signing with Polydor Records. The band's comeback album, Beautiful World, entered the UK album chart at no. 1.
On 10 December 2007 English rock band Led Zeppelin reunited for the one-off Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert at The O2 Arena in London. According to Guinness World Records 2009, Led Zeppelin set the world record for the "Highest Demand for Tickets for One Music Concert" as 20 million requests for the reunion show were rendered online.
Television.
American television in the 2000s saw the sharp increase in popularity of reality television, with numerous competition shows such as "American Idol", "Dancing with the Stars", "Survivor" and "The Apprentice" attracting large audiences, as well as documentary or narrative style shows such as "Big Brother", "The Hills", "The Real Housewives", "Cheaters", among many others. The decade has since seen a steady decline in the number of sitcoms and an increase in reality shows, crime and medical dramas, such as "", "House M.D.", and "Grey's Anatomy", paranormal/crime shows like "Medium" (2005–2011) and "Ghost Whisperer" (2005–2010), and action/drama shows, including "24" and "Lost". Comedy-dramas became more serious, dealing with such hot button issues, such as drugs, teenage pregnancy, and gay rights. Popular comedy-drama programs include "Desperate Housewives," "Ugly Betty", and "Glee". Adult-oriented animated programming also continued a sharp upturn in popularity with controversial cartoons like *"South Park" (1997-today) and "Family Guy" (1999–2002, 2005-today) along with the longtime running cartoon "The Simpsons" (1989-today).
The decade also saw the return of prime time soap operas, a genre that had been popular in the 1980s and early 1990s, these include; Dawsons Creek (1998-2003) The O.C. (2003-2007), One Tree Hill (2003–2012), Desperate Housewives (2004-2012) was perhaps the most popular television series of this genre since Dallas and Dynasty in the 1980s,
ER although started in 1994 ended its run in 2009 after 15 years.
Brass Eye is a UK television series of satirical spoof documentaries. A series of six aired on Channel 4 in 1997, and a further episode in 2001. The series was created by Chris Morris.
The series was repeated in 2001 along with a new show. It tackled paedophilia and the moral panic in parts of the British media following the murder of Sarah Payne, focusing on the name-and-shame campaign conducted by the News of the World in its wake.
The WWE in 2002, between the brands Raw and Smackdown!, also known as the WWE Brand Extension. This resulted in the WWE's purchase of their two biggest competitors, WCW and ECW. The brand extension would last until 2011.
Around 3,000 complaints were received and politicians spoke out against Morris. Beverley Hughes described the show as "unspeakably sick" but later admitted she had not seen it, and David Blunkett said he was "dismayed" by it. It later emerged that he also had not seen the episode, because he is blind. Tessa Jowell, after watching, asked the Independent Television Commission to reinstate censorship to ban similar programmes. There was also a tabloid campaign against Morris, who refused to discuss the issue.
The X Factor in the UK has been subject to much controversy and criticism since its launch in September 2004. Controversy and criticism of The X Factor (UK).
Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy:
Super Bowl XXXVIII, which was broadcast live on February 1, 2004 from Houston, Texas on the CBS television network in the United States, was noted for a controversial halftime show in which singer Janet Jackson's breast, adorned with a nipple shield, was exposed by singer Justin Timberlake for about half a second, in what was later referred to as a "wardrobe malfunction". The incident, sometimes referred to as Nipplegate, was widely discussed. Along with the rest of the halftime show, it led to an immediate crackdown and widespread debate on perceived indecency in broadcasting.
January 2005 - "" was the subject of controversy, when its UK television broadcast on BBC Two elicited 55,000 complaints. The most complained about television event ever.
In May 2005, UK viewers inundated the Advertising Standards Authority with complaints regarding the continuous airing of the latest Crazy Frog advertisements. The intensity of the advertising was unprecedented in British television history. According to "The Guardian", Jamster bought 73,716 spots across all TV channels in May alone — an average of nearly 2,378 slots daily — at a cost of about £8 million, just under half of which was spent on ITV. 87% of the population saw the Crazy Frog adverts an average of 26 times, 15% of the adverts appeared twice during the same advertising break and 66% were in consecutive ad breaks. An estimated 10% of the population saw the advert more than 60 times. This led to many members of the population finding the crazy frog, as its original name suggests, immensely irritating.
Blue Peter (the world's longest-running children's television programme) rigged a phone-in competition supporting the UNICEF "Shoe Biz Appeal" on 27 November 2006. The person who appeared to be calling in the competition was actually a "Blue Peter" Team Player who was visiting that day. The visitor pretended to be a caller from an outside line who had won the phone-in and the chance to select a prize. The competition was rigged due to a technical error with receiving the calls.
In July 2007, "Blue Peter" was given a £50,000 fine, by the Office of Communications (OFCOM) as a result of rigging the competition.
I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! is a reality television game show series, originally created in the United Kingdom, and licensed globally to other countries.
In its 2009 series, celebrity chef Gino D'Acampo killed, cooked and ate a rat. The Australian RSPCA investigated the incident and sought to prosecute D'Acampo and actor Stuart Manning for animal cruelty after this episode of the show was aired. ITV was fined £1,600 and the two celebrities involved were not prosecuted for animal cruelty despite being charged with the offense by the New South Wales Police.
Although there were less in this decade than there were in the 1990s, the 2000s still saw many popular and notable sitcoms, including "Will and Grace", "Malcolm in the Middle", "The King of Queens", "Arrested Development", "How I Met Your Mother", "Scrubs", "Curb Your Enthusiasm", "The Office", "Two and a Half Men", "The Big Bang Theory", "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia", and "30 Rock", among many others. A trend seen in several sitcoms of the late 2000s was the absence of a laugh track.
The decade also saw the rise of premium cable dramas such as "The Sopranos", "Deadwood", "The Wire", "Battlestar Galactica", "Breaking Bad" and "Mad Men". The critic Daniel Mendelsohn wrote a critique of "Mad Men" in which he also claimed this last decade was a golden age for episodic television, citing "Battlestar Galactica", "The Wire", and the network series "Friday Night Lights" as especially deserving of critical and popular attention.
Ended series.
The PBS series "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood" aired its final episode on August 31, 2001. Two years later, its host/composer/creator "Fred Rogers" died from Stomach Cancer.
"Tomorrow's World" was a long-running BBC television series, showcasing new developments in the world of science and technology. First aired on 7 July 1965 on BBC1, it ran for 38 years until it was cancelled at the beginning of 2003.
"Brookside" is a British soap opera set in Liverpool, England. The series began on the launch night of Channel 4 on 2 November 1982, and ran for 21 years until 4 November 2003.
In January 2004, the BBC cancelled the "Kilroy" show (which had run for 18 years), after an article entitled 'We owe Arabs nothing' written by its host Robert Kilroy-Silk was published in the Sunday Express tabloid newspaper.
"Friends" is an American sitcom which aired on NBC from September 22, 1994, to May 6, 2004. Friends received positive reviews throughout its run, and its series finale ranked as the fifth most watched overall television series finale as well as the most watched single television episode of the 2000s on U.S. television.
"Frasier", a spin-off TV series of "Cheers" (that ended in 1993), is an American sitcom that was broadcast on NBC for eleven seasons from September 16, 1993, to May 13, 2004 (only a week after the broadcast of the final episode of "Friends"). It was one of the most successful spin-off and popular series in television history, as well as one of the most critically acclaimed comedy series.
On 20 June 2006, after 42 years, British music chart show "Top of the Pops" was formally cancelled and it was announced that the last edition would be broadcast on 30 July 2006.
Grandstand is a British television sport programme. Broadcast between 1958 and 2007, it was one of the BBC's longest running sports shows.
After 30 years, British television drama series "Grange Hill" (originally made by the BBC) was cancelled and the last episode was shown on 15 September 2008.
Series returns.
The Flower Pot Men is a British children's programme, produced by BBC television, first transmitted in 1952, and repeated regularly for more than twenty years, which was produced in a new version in 2000.
Absolutely Fabulous, also known as Ab Fab, is a British sitcom.
The show has had an extended and sporadic run. The first three series were broadcast on the BBC from 1992 to 1995, followed by a series finale in the form of a two-part television film entitled The Last Shout in 1996. Creator Jennifer Saunders revived the show for a fourth series in 2001.
Gadget and the Gadgetinis is a spinoff of the classic series Inspector Gadget (1983 to 1986), developed by DiC in cooperation with Haim Saban's SIP Animation and produced from 2001 to 2003. There are 52 episodes.
Basil Brush from 1962 to 1984, The Basil Brush Show from 2002 to 2007.
Basil Brush is a fictional anthropomorphic red fox, best known for his appearances on daytime British children's television. He is primarily portrayed by a glove puppet.
Shooting Stars is a British television comedy panel game broadcast on BBC Two as a pilot in 1993, then as 3 full series from 1995 to 1997, then on BBC Choice from January to December 2002 with 2 series before returning to BBC Two for another 3 series from 2008 until its cancellation in 2011.
Doctor Who is a British science fiction television programme produced by the BBC. The show is a significant part of British popular culture.
The programme originally ran from 1963 to 1989. After an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot in the form of a television film, the programme was relaunched in 2005.
Family Fortunes is a British game show, based on the American game show "Family Feud". The programme ran on ITV from 6 January 1980 to 6 December 2002 before being revived by the same channel in 2006 under the title of All Star Family Fortunes. Revived episodes are currently being shown on ITV on Sunday evenings and have been presented by Vernon Kay since 2006.
Gladiators is a British television entertainment series, produced by LWT for ITV, and broadcast between October 10, 1992 and January 1, 2000. It is an adaptation of the American format "American Gladiators". The success of the British series spawned further adaptations in Australia and Sweden. The series was revived in 2008, before again being cancelled in 2009.
Rab C. Nesbitt is a British sitcom which began in 1988.
The first series began on 27 September 1990 and continued for seven more, ending on 18 June 1999 and returning with a one-off special on 23 December 2008.
Red Dwarf is a British comedy franchise which primarily comprises ten series (including a ninth mini-series named "Back To Earth") of a television science fiction sitcom that aired on BBC Two between 1988 and 1993 and from 1997 to 1999 and on Dave in 2009.
Radio.
The 2000s saw a decrease in the popularity of radio as more listeners starting using MP3 players in their cars to customize driving music. Satellite radio receivers started selling at a much higher rate, which allowed listeners to pay a subscription fee for thousands of ad-free stations. Clear Channel Communications was the largest provider of radio entertainment in the United States with over 900 stations nationwide. Many radio stations began streaming their content over the Internet, allowing a market expansion far beyond the reaches of a radio transmitter.
During the 2000s, FM radio faced its toughest competition ever for in-car entertainment. iPod, satellite radio, and HD radio were all new options for commuters. CD players had a steady decline in popularity throughout the 2000s but stayed prevalent in most vehicles, while cassette tapes became virtually obsolete.
Video games.
The world of video games reached the 7th Generation in the form of consoles like the Wii, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 by the mid-2000s. The number-one-selling game console of the decade, the PlayStation 2, was released in 2000 and remained popular up to the end of the decade, even after the PlayStation 3 was released. The Playstation 2 discontinued in January 2013. MMORPGs, originating in the mid-to-late 1990s, become a popular PC trend and virtual online worlds become a reality as games such as "RuneScape" (2001), "Final Fantasy XI" (2002), "Eve Online" (2003), ' (2003), "World of Warcraft" (2004), and "Everquest II" (2004), ' (2007) and "" (2008) are released. These worlds come complete with their own economies and social organization as directed by the players as a whole. The persistent online worlds allow the games to remain popular for many years. "World of Warcraft", premiered in 2004, remains one of the most popular games in PC gaming and is still being developed into the 2010s.
The Grand Theft Auto series sparked a fad of Mature-rated video games based on including gang warfare, drug use, and perceived "senseless violence" into gameplay. Though violent video games date back to the early 1990s, they became much more common after 2000.
"Grand Theft Auto IV" is a 2008 Open world action-adventure video game developed by Rockstar North.
Prior to and since its release, the game has been subject to a great deal of controversy. Controversies surrounding Grand Theft Auto IV.
The Call of Duty series was extremely popular during the 2000s, the diverse shooter franchise released multiple games throughout the 2000s that were positively critically reviewed and commercially successful.
Gears of War was a critically acclaimed and commercially successful third-person shooter franchise that released two games during the mid-late 2000s. Gears of War 1 was released in 2006 and was the first installment to the franchise, it was universally critically acclaimed and went on to sell over 5 million copies. The second installment to the franchise Gears of War 2 was released in 2008 and received widespread critical acclaim and also went on to sell over 5 million copies.
October 29, 2007 - Manhunt 2 - a controversial stealth-based psychological horror video game published by Rockstar Games was suspended by Take-Two Interactive (Rockstar's parent company) when it was refused classification in the United Kingdom, Italy and Ireland, and given an Adults Only (AO) rating in the United States. As neither Sony nor Nintendo allow AO titles on their systems, this effectively meant the game was banned in the US.
The 7th generation sparked a rise in first person shooting games led by , which changed the formula of the first person shooter. Halo 2 started online console gaming and was on top of the Xbox live charts until its successor, Halo 3, took over. Some other popular first-person shooters during the 2000s include the Medal of Honor series, with 's release in 2002 bringing the first game in the series to 7th generation consoles.
In the late 2000s, motion controlled video games grew in popularity, from the PlayStation 2's EyeToy to Nintendo's successful Wii console. During the decade 3D video games become the staple of the video-game industry, with 2D games nearly fading from the market. Partially 3D and fully 2D games were still common in the industry early in the decade, but these have now become rare as developers look almost exclusively for fully 3D games to satisfy the increasing demand for them in the market. An exception to this trend is the indie gaming community, which often produces games featuring 'old-school' or retro gaming elements, such as Minecraft and Shadow Complex. These games, which are not developed by the industry giants, are often available in the form of downloadable content from services such as Microsoft's Xbox Live or Apple's App Store and usually cost much less than more major releases.
Dance Dance Revolution was released in Japan and later the United States, where it became immensely popular among teenagers. Another music game, "Guitar Hero", was released in North America in 2005 and had a huge cultural impact on both the music and video games industries. It became a worldwide billion-dollar franchise within three years, spawning several sequels and leading to the creation of a competing franchise, "Rock Band".
Japanese media giant Nintendo released 9 out of the 10 top selling games of the 2000s, further establishing the company's dominance over the market.
Arcade video games had declined in popularity so much by the late 1990s, that revenues in the United States dropped to $1.33 billion in 1999, and reached a low of $866 million in 2004. Furthermore, by the early 2000s, networked gaming via computers and then consoles across the Internet had also appeared, replacing the venue of head-to-head competition and social atmosphere once provided solely by arcades.
The arcades also lost their status as the forefront of new game releases.
Worldwide, arcade game revenues gradually increased from $1.8 billion in 1998 to $3.2 billion in 2002, rivalling PC game sales of $3.2 billion that same year. In particular, arcade video games are a thriving industry in China, where arcades are widespread across the country. The US market has also experienced a slight resurgence, with the number of video game arcades across the nation increasing from 2,500 in 2003 to 3,500 in 2008, though this is significantly less than the 10,000 arcades in the early 1980s. As of 2009, a successful arcade game usually sells around 4000 to 6000 units worldwide.
Sega Corporation usually styled as SEGA, is a Japanese multinational video game software developer and an arcade software and hardware development company headquartered in Japan, with various offices around the world. Sega previously developed and manufactured its own brand of home video game consoles from 1983 to 2001, but a restructure was announced on January 31, 2001 that ceased continued production of its existing home console, effectively exiting the company from the home console business.
Neo Geo is a family of video game hardware developed by SNK. The brand originated in 1990 with the release of an arcade system, the Neo Geo MVS and its home console counterpart, the Neo Geo AES. The Neo Geo brand was officially discontinued in 2004.
Sports.
The Sydney Games, held in 2000, followed the hundredth anniversary of the Olympic Games in Atlanta in 1996. The Athens Games, in 2004, were also a strong symbol, for modern Olympic Games were inspired by the competitions organized in Ancient Greece. Finally, the Beijing Games saw the emergence of China as a major sports power, with the highest number of titles for the first time. The 2002 Salt Lake City and the 2006 Turin Winter Olympic Games were also major events, though less popular.
A number of concerns and controversies over the 2008 Summer Olympics surfaced before, during, and after the 2008 Summer Olympic games, and which received major media coverage. Leading up to the Olympics, there were concerns about human rights in China, such that many high-profile individuals, such as politicians and celebrities, announced intentions to boycott the games to protest China's role in the Darfur conflict, and Myanmar, its stance towards Tibet, or other aspects of its human rights record.
In a 2008 TIME magazine article entitled 'Why Nobody's Boycotting Beijing' Vivienne Walt wrote:
'Leaders in power are more mindful of China's colossal clout in an increasingly shaky world economy, and therefore of the importance of keeping good relations with its government.'
One of the most prominent events of the 2008 Summer Olympics held in Beijing was the achievement of Michael Phelps the American swimmer, frequently cited as the greatest swimmer and one of the greatest Olympians of all time. He has won 14 career Olympic gold medals, the most by any Olympian. As of August 2, 2009, Phelps has broken thirty-seven world records in swimming. Phelps holds the record for the most gold medals won in a single Olympics, his eight at the 2008 Beijing Games surpassed American swimmer Mark Spitz's seven-gold performance at Munich in 1972.
Usain Bolt of Jamaica dominated the male sprinting events at the Beijing Olympics, in which he broke three world records, allowing him to be the first man to ever accomplish this at a single Olympic game. He holds the world record for the 100 metres (despite slowing down before the finish line to celebrate), the 200 metres and, along with his teammates, the 4x100 metres relay.
The rise of the Ultimate Fighting Championship and the decline of the WWE started to bring wrestling fans away from wrestling and say wrestling was not real and was only for entertainment.
In 2001, after the 9/11 attacks, both the National Football League and Major League Baseball canceled their upcoming games for a week. As a result, the World Series would be played in November for the first time and the Super Bowl would be played in February for the first time.
The Fox hunting sport is controversial, particularly in the UK, where it was banned in Scotland in 2002, and in England and Wales in November 2004 (law enforced from February 2005), though shooting foxes as vermin remained legal.
Ron Atkinson, is an English former football player and manager. In recent years he has become one of Britain's best-known football pundits.
Ron Atkinson's media work came to an abrupt halt on 21 April 2004, when he was urged to resign from ITV by Brian Barwick after he broadcast a racial remark live on air about the black Chelsea player Marcel Desailly; believing the microphone to be switched off, he said, "...he" [Desailly] "is what is known in some schools as a lazy nigger".
Association football's important events included two World Cups, one organized in South Korea, Japan, which saw Brazil win a record fifth title, and the other in Germany, which saw Italy's fourth title. The regional competitions Copa América and Euro Cup saw 5 nations rising the cup, Colombia (2001) and Brazil (2004, 2007) won the Copa América, and France (2000), Greece (2004) and Spain (2008) won the Euro Cup.
Rugby increased in size and audience, as the Rugby World Cup became the third most watched sporting event in the world with the 2007 Rugby World Cup organized in France.
Bloodgate is the nickname for a rugby union scandal involving the English team Harlequins in their Heineken Cup match against the Irish side Leinster on 12 April 2009. It was so called because of the use of fake blood capsules, and has been seen by some as one of the biggest scandals in rugby since professionalisation in the mid-1990s, indeed even as an argument against the professional ethos. The name is a pun on Watergate.
The New York Yankees won the first Major League Baseball World Series of the decade (2000), as well as the last World Series of the decade (2009).
The Boston Red Sox won the World Series of Major League Baseball in 2004, their first since 1918, and then again in 2007.
The Pittsburgh Steelers won a record sixth Super Bowl on February 1, 2009, against the Arizona Cardinals
In September 2004, Chelsea F.C. footballer Adrian Mutu failed a drugs test for cocaine and was released on 29 October 2004. He also received a seven-month ban and a £20,000 fine from the FA.
Michael Schumacher, the most titled F1 driver, won five F1 World Championships during the decade and finally retired in 2006, yet eventually confirming his come-back to F1 for 2010. Lance Armstrong won all the Tour de France between 1999 and 2005, also an all-time record, but was later stripped of all his titles when evidence emerged of his use of performance enhancing drugs. Swiss tennis player Roger Federer won 16 Grand Slam titles to become the most titled player.
The 2006 Italian football scandal involved Italy's top professional football leagues, Serie A and Serie B. The scandal was uncovered in May 2006 by Italian police, implicating league champions Juventus, and other major teams including AC Milan, Fiorentina, Lazio, and Reggina when a number of telephone interceptions showed a thick network of relations between team managers and referee organisations. Juventus were the champions of Serie A at the time. The teams have been accused of rigging games by selecting favourable referees.
2006 FIFA World Cup Final in Berlin, Zinedine Zidane widely considered by experts and fans as one of the greatest football players of all time, was sent off in the 110th minute of the game, which was to be the last match of his career; after headbutting Marco Materazzi in the chest, so he did not participate in the penalty shootout which Italy won 5–3. It was later discovered through interviews that Materazzi had insulted Zidane's mother and sister that last moment which is what led to Zidane's heightened anger and reaction.
January 11, 2007 - When English footballer David Beckham joined the Major League Soccer's Los Angeles Galaxy, he was given the highest player salary in the league's history; with his playing contract with the Galaxy over the next three years being worth US$6.5m per year.
October 2007 - US world champion track and field athlete Marion Jones admitted that she took performance-enhancing drugs as far back as the 2000 Summer Olympics, and that she had lied about it to a grand jury investigating performance-enhancer creations.
November 29, 2007 - Portsmouth F.C. football manager Harry Redknapp angrily denied any wrongdoing after being arrested by police investigating alleged corruption in football: "If you are telling me this is how you treat anyone, it is not the society I grew up in."
The 2008 Wimbledon final between Roger Federer of Switzerland and Rafael Nadal of Spain, has been lauded as the greatest match ever by many long-time tennis analysts.
British Formula One racing driver Lewis Hamilton, was disqualified from the 2009 Australian Grand Prix for providing "misleading evidence" during the stewards' hearing. He later privately apologised to FIA race director Charlie Whiting for having lied to the stewards.
In 2009, the World football transfer record was set by the Spanish football club Real Madrid C.F.'s buying of Manchester United's player Cristiano Ronaldo, for 80 million GBP (93 million euros).
Manchester United veteran Sir Bobby Charlton said the world-record offer shocked him:
"It's a lot of money, it's crazy really. If you want to be in the race, you have to pay the price, it seems sometimes a little bit vulgar."
Steroids also spread the sports world throughout the decade, mainly used in Major League Baseball. Players such as Barry Bonds, Mark McGwire, Sammy Sosa, and Alex Rodriguez.
Writing.
Peter Pan; or, the Boy Who Wouldn't Grow Up or Peter and Wendy is J. M. Barrie's most famous work, in the form of a 1904 play and a 1911 novel, respectively.
Fashion.
Fashion trends of the decade drew much inspiration from 1960s, 1970s and 1980s styles. Hair styles included the bleached and spiked hair for boys and men and long and straight hair for girls and women continued, as well as many other hairstyles from the mid-late 1990s. Kelly Clarkson made chunky highlights fashionable in 2002 on American Idol and lasted until about 2007. Both women and men highlighted their hair until the late 2000s.
The decade started with the futuristic Y2K fashion which was built on hype surrounding the new millennium. This dark, slinky style remained popular until 9/11 occurred and casual fashions had made a comeback once again. Baggy cargo pants were extremely popular among both sexes throughout the early and mid 2000s until about late 2007. Bell-bottoms were the dominant pant style for women until about 2006 when fitted pants began rising in popularity. The late 1990s-style baggy pants remained popular throughout the early 2000s, but by 2003 boot-cut pants and jeans became the standard among men until about 2008.
The 2000s saw a revival of 1980s fashion trends such as velour tracksuits in the early 2000s (an early 1980s fashion), and tapered pants in the later years (a late 1980s fashion). Skinny jeans became a staple clothing for young women and men by 2009 with the Jerkin' movement playing a large part in the popularization of skinny jeans. Mass brands Gap and Levi launched their own lines for skinny jeans.
Throughout the early and mid 2000s, adults and children wore Skechers shoes. The company used many celebrities to their advantage, including Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera, Carrie Underwood, and Ashlee Simpson. By the late 2000s, flatter and more compact shoes came into style as chunky sneakers were no longer the mode.
"Geek chic" refers to a minor fashion trend that arose in the mid-2000s in which young individuals adopted stereotypically "geeky" fashions, such as oversized black Horn-rimmed glasses, suspenders/braces, and highwater trousers. The glasses- worn with non-prescription lenses or without lenses—quickly became the defining aspect of the trend, with the media identifying various celebrities as "trying geek" or "going geek" for their wearing such glasses, such as David Beckham, Justin Timberlake and Myleene Klass. Meanwhile, in the sports world, many NBA players wore "geek glasses" during post-game interviews, drawing comparisons to Steve Urkel.
Emo fashion became popular amongst teenagers from 2005-2009, associated with the success of bands associated with the subculture (such as My Chemical Romance and Fall Out Boy). The style is commonly identified with wearing black/dark coloured skinny jeans, T-shirts bearing the name of emo music groups and long side-swept bangs, often covering one or both eyes. The associated subculture provoked controversy over perceived links with self-harm and suicide. The Scene subculture that emerged in the mid-late 2000s drew much inspiration from Emo style.
Hip hop fashion was popular throughout the 2000s with clothing and shoe brands such as Rocawear, Phat Farm, G-Unit clothing, Billionaire Boys Club, Dipset clothing, Pelle Pelle, BAPE, Nike, and Air Jordan. Followers of Hip Hop wore oversized shorts, jewelry, NFL and NBA jerseys, pants, and T-shirts. By the late 2000s this gave way more to fitted and vibrantly colored clothing, with men wearing skinny jeans as influenced by the Hyphy and Jerkin' movements.
In cosmetic applications, a Botox injection, consisting of a small dose of Botulinum toxin, can be used to prevent development of wrinkles by paralyzing facial muscles. As of 2007, it is the most common cosmetic operation, with 4.6 million procedures in the United States, according to the American Society of Plastic Surgeons.
Journalism.
 He says this Murdochisation of national discourse, which was at its height in the UK with "The Sun" in the 1980s, has now migrated to the US. "Murdoch encouraged an ugly tone, which he has now imported into the US and which we see every day on Fox News, with all its concomitant effects on American public life – that fierce hostility between right and left that never used to be there, not to anything remotely like the same extent."
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
2000 • 2001 • 2002 • 2003 • 2004 • 2005 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008 • 2009

</doc>
<doc id="34580" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34580" title="26">
26

Year 26 (XXVI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Sabinus (or, less frequently, year 779 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 26 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34583" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34583" title="1940s">
1940s

The 1940s was a decade that began on January 1, 1940 and ended on December 31, 1949.
Most of the Second World War took place in the first half of the decade, which had a profound effect on most countries and people in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere. The consequences of the war lingered well into the second half of the decade, with a war-weary Europe divided between the jostling spheres of influence of the West and the Soviet Union, leading to the beginning of the Cold War. To some degree internal and external tensions in the post-war era were managed by new institutions, including the United Nations, the welfare state and the Bretton Woods system, facilitating the post–World War II boom, which lasted well into the 1970s. However the conditions of the post-war world encouraged decolonialization and emergence of new states and governments, with India, Pakistan, Israel, Vietnam and others declaring independence, although rarely without bloodshed. The decade also witnessed the early beginnings of new technologies (including computers, nuclear power and jet propulsion), often first developed in tandem with the war effort, and later adapted and improved upon in the post-war era.
Popular culture.
Film.
Although the 1940s was a decade dominated by World War II, important and noteworthy films about a wide variety of subjects were made during that era. Hollywood was instrumental in producing dozens of classic films during the 1940s, several of which were about the war and some are on most lists of all-time great films. European cinema survived although obviously curtailed during wartime and yet many films of high quality were made in the United Kingdom, France, Italy, the Soviet Union and elsewhere in Europe. The cinema of Japan also survived. Akira Kurosawa and other directors managed to produce significant films during the 1940s.
Film Noir, a film style that incorporated crime dramas with dark images, became largely prevalent during the decade. Films such as "The Maltese Falcon" and "The Big Sleep" are considered classics and helped launch the careers of legendary actors such as Humphrey Bogart and Ava Gardner. The genre has been widely copied since its initial inception.
In France during the war the tour de force "Children of Paradise" directed by Marcel Carné (1945), was shot in Nazi occupied Paris. Memorable films from post-war England include David Lean's "Great Expectations" (1946) and "Oliver Twist" (1948), Carol Reed's "Odd Man Out" (1947) and "The Third Man" (1949), and Powell and Pressburger's "A Matter of Life and Death" (1946), "Black Narcissus" (1946) and "The Red Shoes" (1948), Laurence Olivier's "Hamlet", the first non-American film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture and "Kind Hearts and Coronets" (1949) directed by Robert Hamer. Italian neorealism of the 1940s produced poignant movies made in post-war Italy. "Roma, città aperta" directed by Roberto Rossellini (1945), "Sciuscià" directed by Vittorio De Sica (1946), "Paisà" directed by Roberto Rossellini (1946), "La terra trema" directed by Luchino Visconti (1948), "The Bicycle Thief" directed by Vittorio De Sica (1948), and "Bitter Rice" directed by Giuseppe De Santis (1949), are some well-known examples.
In Japanese cinema "The 47 Ronin" is a 1941 black and white two-part Japanese film directed by Kenji Mizoguchi. "The Men Who Tread on the Tiger's Tail" (1945), and the post-war "Drunken Angel" (1948), and "Stray Dog" (1949), directed by Akira Kurosawa are considered important early works leading to his first masterpieces of the 1950s. "Drunken Angel" (1948), marked the beginning of the successful collaboration between Kurosawa and actor Toshiro Mifune that lasted until 1965.
Fashion.
Even with the challenges imposed by shortages in rayon, nylon, wool, leather, rubber, metal (for snaps, buckles, and embellishments), and even the amount of fabric that could be used in any one garment, the fashion industry's wheels kept chugging slowly along, producing what it could. After the fall of France in 1940, Hollywood drove fashion in the United States almost entirely, with the exception of a few trends coming from war torn London in 1944 and 1945, as America's own rationing hit full force, and the idea of function seemed to overtake fashion, if only for a few short months until the end of the war. Fabrics shifted dramatically as rationing and wartime shortages controlled import items such as silk and furs. Floral prints seem to dominate the early 1940s, with the mid-to-late 1940s also seeing what is sometimes referred to as "atomic prints" or geometric patterns and shapes. The color of fashion seemed to even go to war, with patriotic nautical themes and dark greens and khakis dominating the color palettes, as trousers and wedges slowly replaced the dresses and more traditional heels due to shortages in stockings and gasoline.
People.
Sports.
During the 1940s Sporting events were disrupted and changed by the events that engaged and shaped the entire world. The 1940 and 1944 Olympic Games were cancelled because of World War II. During World War II in the United States Heavyweight Boxing Champion Joe Louis and numerous stars and performers from American baseball and other sports served in the armed forces until the end of the war. Among the many baseball players (including well known stars) who served during World War II were Moe Berg, Joe DiMaggio, Bob Feller, Hank Greenberg, Stan Musial (in 1945), Warren Spahn, and Ted Williams. They like many others sacrificed their personal and valuable career time for the benefit and well being of the rest of society. The Summer Olympics were resumed in 1948 in London and the Winter games were held that year in St. Moritz, Switzerland.
Baseball.
During the early 1940s World War II had an enormous impact on Major League Baseball as many players including many of the most successful stars joined the war effort. After the war many players returned to their teams, while the major event of the second half of the 1940s was the 1945 signing of Jackie Robinson to a players contract by Branch Rickey the general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers. Signing Robinson opened the door to the integration of Major League Baseball finally putting an end to the professional discrimination that had characterized the sport since the 19th century.
Boxing.
During the mid-1930s and throughout the years leading up to the 1940s Joe Louis was an enormously popular Heavyweight boxer. In 1936 he lost an important 12 round fight (his first loss) to the German boxer Max Schmeling and he vowed to meet Schmeling once again in the ring. Louis' comeback bout against Schmeling became an international symbol of the struggle between the USA and democracy against Nazism and Fascism. When on June 22, 1938, Louis knocked Schmeling out in the first few seconds of the first round during their rematch at Yankee Stadium, his sensational comeback victory riveted the entire nation. Louis enlisted in the U.S. Army on January 10, 1942 in response to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Louis' cultural impact was felt well outside the ring. He is widely regarded as the first African American to achieve the status of a nationwide hero within the United States, and was also a focal point of anti-Nazi sentiment leading up to and during World War II.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines listing the most prominent events of the decade.
1940 • 1941 • 1942 • 1943 • 1944 • 1945 • 1946 • 1947 • 1948 • 1949

</doc>
<doc id="34584" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34584" title="1947">
1947

1947 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34585" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34585" title="1624">
1624

Year 1624 (MDCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>
Births.
"Date unknown"

</doc>
<doc id="34586" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34586" title="1626">
1626

Year 1626 (MDCXXVI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34587" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34587" title="1642">
1642

Year 1642 (MDCXLII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34588" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34588" title="1661">
1661

Year 1661 (MDCLXI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34589" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34589" title="1756">
1756

Year 1756 (MDCCLVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34590" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34590" title="1791">
1791

Year 1791 (MDCCXCI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34591" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34591" title="1608">
1608

Year 1608 (MDCVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34592" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34592" title="1818">
1818

Year 1818 (MDCCCXVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34594" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34594" title="1918">
1918

1918 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, events of World War I have the "WWI" prefix.

</doc>
<doc id="34595" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34595" title="1917">
1917

1917 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, events of World War I have the "WWI" prefix.

</doc>
<doc id="34596" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34596" title="1743">
1743

Year 1743 (MDCCXLIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
July–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34597" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34597" title="1826">
1826

Year 1826 (MDCCCXXVI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34598" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34598" title="1993">
1993

1993 ()
will be .
Events.
October.
The U.S. Army conducts Operation Gothic Serpent in the city of Mogadishu, Somalia, using Task Force Ranger. Two UH-60 Blackhawks are shot down and the operation leaves over 1,000 Somalians dead and over 73 Americans WIA, 19 KIA, and 1 captured.
References.
</dl>

</doc>
<doc id="34599" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34599" title="1492">
1492

Year 1492 (MCDXCII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34600" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34600" title="1908">
1908

1908 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34601" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34601" title="1997">
1997

1997 ()
will be .
It is notable as being the year Hong Kong was handed back to China from the United Kingdom.

</doc>
<doc id="34602" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34602" title="1951">
1951

1951 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34603" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34603" title="Election threshold">
Election threshold

The electoral threshold is the minimum share of the vote which a political party requires to secure any representation.
This limit can operate in various ways. For example:
In party-list proportional representation systems, an election threshold is a rule that requires that a party must receive a specified minimum percentage of votes (e.g. 5%), either nationally or within a particular district, to obtain any seats in the parliament.
If there are a number of multi-member constituencies, each constituency will have a quota, i.e. a minimum percentage of the votes in that constituency to be awarded one seat.
One can define two boundaries: a threshold of representation is the minimum vote share that might yield a party a seat (under the most favorable circumstances for the party), while the threshold of exclusion is the maximum vote share that could be insufficient to yield a party a seat (under the least favorable circumstances for the party). Lijphart suggested calculating the informal threshold as the mean of these.
The effect of an electoral threshold is to deny representation to small parties or to force them into coalitions, with the presumption of rendering the election system more stable by keeping out radical factions. It is also argued that in the absence of a ranked ballot system supporters of minor parties are effectively disenfranchised and denied the right of representation by someone of their choosing.
Legal election thresholds in various countries.
In Poland's Sejm, Germany's Bundestag and New Zealand's House of Representatives, the threshold is 5%. However, in Germany and New Zealand, if a party wins a minimum number of directly elected seats—three in Germany and one in New Zealand—the threshold does not apply (though the directly elected seats are kept regardless). The threshold is 3.25% in Israel's Knesset (it was 1% before 1992, 1.5% in 1992–2003 and 2% until March 2014), and 10% in the Turkish parliament. In Poland, ethnic minority parties do not have to reach the threshold level to get into the parliament, and so there is always a small German minority representation in the Sejm. In Romania, for the ethnic minority parties there is a different threshold than for the national parties that run for the Chamber of Deputies.
There are also countries such as Portugal, South Africa, Finland, the Netherlands, and the Republic of Macedonia, that have proportional representation systems without a legal threshold, although the Netherlands has a rule that the first seat can never be a remainder seat, which means that there is an effective threshold of 100% divided by the total number of seats. In the Slovenian parliamentary elections of 1992 and 1996 the threshold was set at 3 parliamentary seats. This meant that the parties needed to win about 3.2% of the votes in order to pass the threshold. In 2000 the threshold was raised to 4% of the votes.
In Sweden, there is a nationwide threshold of 4%, but if a party reaches 12% in one election district, it will take part in the seat allocation for that district. However, through the 2010 election, nobody has been elected based on the 12% rule. In Norway the nationwide electoral threshold of 4% applies only to leveling seats. A party with sufficient local support may still win the regular district seats, even if the party fails to meet the threshold. Following the 2009 election, the Liberal Party won two seats in this manner.
In Australia, which uses a single transferable vote proportional representation system, they avoided the need for a formal electoral threshold by establishing smaller electorates with each multi-member electorate returning fewer members of a Parliament and as such requiring a higher quota percentage in order to be elected. As Australia also uses a ranked voting system supporters of minor parties are not disenfranchised as their votes are redistributed to other candidates according to the voter's nominated order of preference which can then form part of another candidates winning quota.
In elections to the Danish Folketing, the electoral threshold is two percent of the valid votes cast in the election.
In the United States, as the majority of elections are conducted under the first-past-the-post system, legal election thresholds do not apply in the actual voting. However, several states have threshold requirements for parties to obtain automatic ballot access to the next general election without having to submit voter-signed petitions. The threshold requirements have no practical bearing on the two main political parties (the Republican and Democratic parties) as they easily meet the requirements, but have come into play for minor parties such as the Green and Libertarian parties. The threshold rules also apply for independent candidates to obtain ballot access.
Countries can have more than one threshold. Germany, as mentioned earlier, has a "regular" threshold of 5%, but a party winning three constituency seats in the Bundestag can gain additional representation even if it has achieved under 5% of the total vote. Most multiple-threshold systems are still in the proposal stage. For example, in Canada, one proposal to reform the electoral system would see a 5% national threshold, 1% of the vote and 1 seat in the House of Commons, or 2% nationally and 15% of the vote in any one province.
Election thresholds are often implemented with the intention of bringing stability to the political system.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe recommends for parliamentary elections a threshold not higher than 3%. However a 2007 European Court of Human Rights decision, "Yumak and Sadak v. Turkey", held that Turkey's 10% threshold did not violate Article 3 of Protocol 1 of the ECHR (right to free elections). Because Turkey has no limits for independent candidates, the 10% rule has to some extent been circumvented by parties running candidates as independents.
Notable failures to reach the threshold.
Examples of elections where established parties fall below the threshold are:
The amount of unrepresented vote.
Election thresholds can sometimes seriously affect the relationship between the percentages of the popular vote achieved by each party and the distribution of seats.
In the Russian parliamentary elections in 1995, with a threshold excluding parties under 5%, more than 45% of votes went to parties that failed to reach the threshold. In 1998, the Russian Constitutional Court found the threshold legal, taking into account limits in its use.
There has been a similar position in Turkey, which has a 10% threshold: easily higher than in any other country. The justification for such a high threshold was to prevent multi-party coalitions and put a stop to the endless fragmentation of political parties seen in the 1960s and 1970s. However, coalitions ruled between 1991 and 2002, mainstream parties continued to be fragmented and in the 2002 elections as many as 45% of votes were cast for parties which failed to reach the threshold and were thus unrepresented in the parliament.
In the Ukrainian elections of March 2006, for which there was a threshold of 3% (of the overall vote, i.e. including invalid votes), 22% of voters were effectively disenfranchised, having voted for minor candidates. In the parliamentary election held under the same system, fewer voters supported minor parties and the total percentage of disenfranchised voters fell to about 12%.
In Bulgaria, 24% of voters cast their ballots for parties that would not gain representation in the elections of 1991 and 2013.
In the Philippines where party-list seats are only contested in 20% of the 287 seats in the lower house, the effect of the 2% threshold is increased by the large number of parties participating in the election, which means that the threshold is harder to reach. This led to a quarter of valid votes being wasted, on average, and led to the 20% of the seats never being allocated due to the 3-seat cap. In 2007, the 2% threshold was altered to allow parties with less than 1% of first preferences to receive a seat each, the proportion of wasted votes reduced slightly to 21%, but it again increased to 29% in 2010 due to an increase in number of participating parties. These statistics take no account of the wasted votes for a party which is entitled to more than three seats but cannot claim those seats due to the three-seat cap.
Election thresholds can produce a spoiler effect, similar to that in the first-past-the-post voting system, in which minor parties unable to reach the threshold take votes away from other parties with similar ideologies. Fledgling parties in these systems often find themselves in a vicious circle: if a party is perceived as having no chance of meeting the threshold, it often cannot gain popular support, and if the party cannot gain popular support, it will continue to have little or no chance of meeting the threshold. As well as acting against extremist parties, it may also adversely affect moderate parties if the political climate becomes polarized between two major parties at opposite ends of the political spectrum: in such a scenario, moderate voters may abandon their preferred party in favour of a more popular party in the hope of keeping the even less desirable alternative out of power.
On occasion, election thresholds have resulted in a party winning an outright majority of seats without winning an outright majority of votes, the sort of outcome that a proportional voting system is supposed to prevent. For instance, the Turkish AK Party won a majority of seats with less than 50% of votes in three consecutive elections (2002, 2007 and 2011). 
In contrast, elections which use the ranked voting system can take account of each voter's complete indicated ranking preference. For example, the single transferable vote redistributes first preference votes for candidates below the threshold. This permits the continued participation in the election by those whose votes would otherwise be wasted. Minor parties can indicate to their supporters before the vote how they would wish to see their votes transferred. Ranked voting systems are widely used in Australia and Ireland.

</doc>
<doc id="34604" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34604" title="1949">
1949

1949 ()
will be .
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>
Births.
September.
 
October.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34605" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34605" title="1911">
1911

1911 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34606" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34606" title="1957">
1957

1957 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34607" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34607" title="386BSD">
386BSD

386BSD, sometimes called "Jolix", was a free Unix-like operating system based on BSD, first released in 1992. It ran on PC-compatible computer systems based on the Intel 80386 microprocessor. 386BSD innovations include role-based security, ring buffers, self-ordered configuration and modular kernel design. The BSDs for PC descend from it.
History.
386BSD was written mainly by Berkeley alumni Lynne Jolitz and William Jolitz. William Jolitz had considerable experience with prior BSD releases while at the University of California at Berkeley (2.8 and 2.9BSD) and both contributed code developed at Symmetric Computer Systems during the 1980s, to Berkeley. Work on porting 4.3BSD-Reno and later 4.3BSD Net/2 to the Intel 80386 was done for the University of California by William Jolitz at Berkeley. 4.3BSD Net/2 was an incomplete non-operational release, with portions withheld by the University of California as "encumbered" (i.e. subject to an AT&T UNIX source code license). The 386BSD releases made to the public beginning in 1992 were based on portions of the 4.3BSD Net/2 release coupled with additional code (see "Missing Pieces I and II", Dr. Dobb's Journal, May–June 1992) written by William and Lynne Jolitz to make a complete operational release.
The port began in 1989 and the first, incomplete traces of the port can be found in 4.3BSD Net/2 of 1991. It was first released in March 1992 (version 0.0) and in a much more usable version on July 14, 1992 (version 0.1). The porting process with code was extensively documented in an 18-part series written by Lynne Jolitz and William Jolitz in Dr. Dobbs Journal beginning in January 1991.
FreeBSD and NetBSD.
After the release of 386BSD 0.1, a group of users began collecting bug fixes and enhancements, releasing them as an unofficial "patchkit". Due to differences of opinion between the Jolitzes and the patchkit maintainers over the future direction and release schedule of 386BSD, the maintainers of the patchkit founded the FreeBSD project in 1993 to continue their work. Around the same time, the NetBSD project was founded by a different group of 386BSD users, with the aim of unifying 386BSD with other strands of BSD development into one multi-platform system. Both projects continue to this day.
Lawsuit.
Due to a lawsuit (USL v. Regents of the University of California), some potentially so-called "encumbered" source was agreed to have been distributed within the Berkeley Software Distribution from the University of California, and a subsequent release (1993, 4.4BSD-Lite) was made by the University to correct this issue. However, 386BSD, Dr. Dobbs Journal, and William Jolitz and Lynne Jolitz were never parties to these or subsequent lawsuits or settlements arising from this dispute with the University of California, and continued to publish and work on the 386BSD code base before, during, and after these lawsuits without limitation. There has never been any legal filings or claims from the University, USL, or other responsible parties with respect to 386BSD. Finally, no code developed for 386BSD done by William Jolitz and Lynne Jolitz was at issue in any of these lawsuits.
Release 1.0.
In late 1994, a finished version 386BSD Release 1.0 was distributed by Dr. Dobb's Journal on CDROM only due to the immense size (600 MB) of the release (the "386BSD Reference CD-ROM") and was a best-selling CDROM for three years (1994–1997). 386BSD Release 1.0 contained a completely new kernel design and implementation, and began the process to incorporate recommendations made by earlier Berkeley designers that had never been attempted in BSD.
Relationship with BSD/386.
386BSD is often confused with BSD/386 which was a different project developed by BSDi, a Berkeley spinout, starting in 1991. BSD/386 used the same 386BSD code contributed to the University of California on "4.3BSD NET/2". Although Jolitz worked briefly for UUNET (which later spun out BSDi) in 1991, the work he did for them diverged from that contributed to the University of California and did not appear in 386BSD. Instead, William Jolitz gave regular code updates to Donn Seeley of BSDi for packaging and testing, and returned all materials when William Jolitz left that company following fundamental disagreements on company direction and goals.
Copyright and use of the code.
All rights with respect to 386BSD and JOLIX are now held exclusively by William Jolitz and Lynne Jolitz. 386BSD public releases ended in 1997 since code is now available from the many 386BSD-derived operating systems today, along with several derivatives thereof (such as Apple's Darwin and OpenBSD). Portions of 386BSD may be found in other open systems such as OpenSolaris.
Further reading.
 1/91: DDJ "Designing a Software Specification"
 2/91: DDJ "Three Initial PC Utilities"
 3/91: DDJ "The Standalone System"
 4/91: DDJ "Copyright, Copyleft, and Competitive Advantage"
 4/91: DDJ "Language Tools Cross-Support"
 5/91: DDJ "The Initial Root Filesystem"
 6/91: DDJ "Research and the Commercial Sector: Where Does BSD Fit In?"
 7/91: DDJ "A Stripped-Down Kernel"
 8/91: DDJ "The Basic Kernel"
 9/91: DDJ "Multiprogramming and Multiprocessing, Part I"
 10/91: DDJ "Multiprogramming and Multiprocessing, Part II"
 11/91: DDJ "Device Autoconfiguration"
 2/92: DDJ "UNIX Device Drivers, Part I"
 3/92: DDJ "UNIX Device Drivers, Part II"
 4/92: DDJ "UNIX Device Drivers, Part III"
 5/92: DDJ "Missing Pieces, Part I"
 6/92: DDJ "Missing Pieces, Part II"
 7/92: DDJ "The Final Step: Running Light with 386BSD"

</doc>
<doc id="34608" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34608" title="1931">
1931

1931 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34609" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34609" title="1926">
1926

1926 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34610" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34610" title="1969">
1969

1969 ()
will be . The year is associated with the first manned landing on the Moon (Apollo 11).

</doc>
<doc id="34611" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34611" title="Names of God in Islam">
Names of God in Islam

The names of God in Islam (or the 99 names of Allah; Arabic: أسماء الله الحسنى‎ "ʾasmāʾ allāh al-ḥusnā") are the names by which Muslims regard God. Among other places, they are described in the Quran and Sunnah. There is, according to "hadith", a special group of 99 names, but no enumeration of them. Thus the exact list is not agreed upon, and the names of God (as adjectives, word constructs, or otherwise) exceed a total of 99 in the Quran and Sunnah. According to a "hadith" narrated by Abdullah ibn Mas'ud, some of the names of God have also been hidden from mankind.
Origin.
According to Islamic tradition, Muhammad is said to have invoked God by a number of names. The most common hadith used to cite the 99 names is considered weak, though there are less commonly cited hadith which are considered authentic and also support the same point. A widely accepted hadith in Sahih Muslim states:
Abu Hurairah reported Allah's Messenger [Muhammad] (may peace be upon him) as saying: "There are ninety-nine names of Allah; he who commits them to memory would get into Paradise. Verily, Allah is Odd (He is one and it is an odd number) and He loves odd numbers. And in the narration of Ibn 'Umar [the words are]: "He who enumerated them"." —Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj Nishapuri , "Sahih Muslim" 
Over time, it became custom to recite a list of 99 names, compiled by al-Walid ibn Muslim, as an addendum to the "hadith". In 2005, Mahmoud Abdel-Razek compiled an alternative list, endorsing only 69 from the al-Walid list.
The Quran refers to the names of God as God's "most beautiful Names" ("al-ʾasmāʾ al-ḥusnā"). According to Gerhard Böwering:
They are traditionally enumerated as 99 in number to which is added as the highest Name (al-ism al-ʾaʿẓam), the Supreme Name of God: Allāh. The for listing the Divine Names in the literature of Qurʾānic commentary is , “Call upon God, or call upon The Merciful; whichsoever you call upon, to Him belong the most beautiful Names,” and also , which includes a cluster of more than a dozen Divine epithets.
 Mystic philosopher Ibn Arabi surmised that the 99 names are outward signs of the universe's inner mysteries.
Most, though not all, of the 99 names appear in the Quran with a smaller number appearing exclusively in the hadith. The total number of all names in both the Quran and the hadith actually add up to more than 99, though only 99 are supposedly those which are referred to in the hadith as the exclusion of others.
Lists of names.
There isn't universal agreement among Muslims as to what exactly counts as a name and what does not. Additionally, while some names are only in the Quran, and others are only in the hadith, there are some names which appear in both. Different sources give different lists of the 99 names.
The Greatest Name.
The 99 names point to the inherent unity of the all-embracing Greatest Name (Ismi Azam). In Islamic traditions, it is stated "The Greatest Name of Allah is the one which if He [Allah] is called (prayed to) by it, He will Answer."
Personal names.
According to Islamic tradition, a Muslim may not be given any of the 99 names of God in exactly the same form. For example, nobody may be named "al-Malik" (The King), but may be named "Malik" (King). This is because of the belief that God is almighty, and no human being is the equivalent of God, and no human being will ever be the equivalent of God. Muslims are allowed to use the 99 names of God for themselves but should not put 'Al' at the front of them.
However the names of God can be combined with the word "‘Abd-" which means "servant/Worshiper" (of God) and are commonly used as personal names among Muslims. For example "‘Abd ar-Raḥmān" ("Servant of the Most Compassionate/the Beneficent"). The two parts of the name may be written separately (as above) or combined as one transliterated name; in such a case, the vowel transcribed after ‘"Abd" is often written as u when the two words are transcribed as one: e.g., "Abdurrahman", "Abdul'aziz", "Abdul Jabbar", or even "Abdullah" ("Servant of God"). (This has to do with Arabic case vowels, the final u vowel showing the normal "quote" nominative/vocative case form: "‘abd-u".)
Some Muslim people have names resembling those 99. Examples include:
Views of other religions.
Bábí and Bahá'í view.
Bahá'í sources state that the 100th name was revealed as "Bahá’" (an Arabic word بهاء meaning "glory, splendor" etc.), which is the root word for Bahá'u'lláh and Bahá'í. They also believe that it is the 'Greatest Name'. The Báb wrote a noted pentagram-shaped tablet with 360 derivatives of the word "Bahá'" used in it.
According to Bahá'í scholar ‘Abdu’l-Hamíd Ishráq-Khávari, Baha' ad-Din al-`Amili adopted the pen name ("takhallus") 'Baha' after being inspired by words of Shi'a Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (the fifth Imam) and Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (the sixth Imam), who had stated that the Greatest Name of God was included in either Du'ay-i-Sahar or A`amaal Ummi Dawud. In the first verse of the Du'ay-i-Sahar, a dawn prayer for Ramadan, the name "Bahá" appears four times: "Allahumma inni as 'aluka min Bahá' ika bi Abháh va kulla Bahá' ika Bahí".

</doc>
<doc id="34612" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34612" title="1948">
1948

1948 ()
will be .
Births.
February.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34613" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34613" title="1930s">
1930s

The 1930s (normally pronounced "Nineteen-Thirties" or "Thirties") was a decade that began on January 1, 1930 and ended on December 31, 1939.
After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, the largest stock market crash in American history, most of the decade was consumed by an economic downfall called the Great Depression that had a traumatic effect worldwide, leading to widespread unemployment and poverty. In response, authoritarian regimes emerged in several countries in Europe and South America, in particular the Third Reich in Germany. Weaker states such as Ethiopia, China, and Poland were invaded by expansionist world powers, the last of these attacks leading to the outbreak of the Second World War a few months before the end of the decade. The 1930s also saw a proliferation of new technologies, especially in the fields of intercontinental aviation, radio, and film.
Politics and wars.
Major political changes.
United States
Assassinations.
The 1930s were marked by several notable assassinations:
International issues.
Africa.
Hertzog of South Africa, whose National Party had won the 1929 election alone, after splitting with the Labour Party, received much of the blame for the devastating economic impact of the depression.
Technology.
Many technological advances occurred in the 1930s, including:
Popular culture.
Film.
In the art of film making, the Golden Age of Hollywood entered a whole decade, after the advent of talking pictures ("talkies") in 1927 and full-color films in 1930: more than 50 classic films were made in the 1930s:
most notable were "Gone With The Wind" and "The Wizard of Oz."
Visual arts.
Social Realism became an important art movement during the Great Depression in the United States in the 1930s. Social realism generally portrayed imagery with socio-political meaning. Other related American artistic movements of the 1930s were American scene painting and Regionalism which were generally depictions of rural America, and historical images drawn from American history. Precisionism with its depictions of industrial America was also a popular art movement during the 1930s in the USA. During the Great Depression the art of photography played an important role in the Social Realist movement. The work of Dorothea Lange, Walker Evans, Margaret Bourke-White, Lewis Hine, Edward Steichen, Gordon Parks, Arthur Rothstein, Marion Post Wolcott, Doris Ulmann, Berenice Abbott, Aaron Siskind, Russell Lee, Ben Shahn (as a photographer) among several others were particularly influential.
The Works Progress Administration part of the Roosevelt Administration's New Deal sponsored the Federal Art Project, the Public Works of Art Project, and the Section of Painting and Sculpture which employed many American artists and helped them to make a living during the Great Depression.
Mexican muralism was a Mexican art movement that took place primarily in the 1930s. The movement stands out historically because of its political undertones, the majority of which of a Marxist nature, or related to a social and political situation of post-revolutionary Mexico. Also in Latin America Symbolism and Magic Realism were important movements.
In Europe during the 1930s and the Great Depression, Surrealism, late Cubism, the Bauhaus, De Stijl, Dada, German Expressionism, Symbolist and modernist painting in various guises characterized the art scene in Paris and elsewhere.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1930 • 1931 • 1932 • 1933 • 1934 • 1935 • 1936 • 1937 • 1938 • 1939

</doc>
<doc id="34614" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34614" title="1939">
1939

1939 ()
will be . This year also marks the start of the Second World War, the deadliest human conflict in history.
Events.
Below, events of World War II have the WWII prefix.
Births.
September.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34615" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34615" title="1920s">
1920s

The 1920s was a decade that began on January 1, 1920 and ended on December 31, 1929. In North America, it is frequently referred to as the Roaring Twenties or the Jazz Age, while in Europe the period is sometimes referred to as the "Golden Age Twenties" because of the economic boom following World War I. French speakers refer to the period as the "années folles" ("Crazy Years"), emphasizing the era's social, artistic, and cultural dynamism.
The economic prosperity experienced by many countries during the 1920s (especially the United States) was similar in nature to that experienced in the 1950s and 1990s. Each period of prosperity was the result of a paradigm shift in global affairs. These shifts in the 1920s, 1950s, and 1990s, occurred as the result of the conclusion of World War I and Spanish flu, World War II, and the Cold War, respectively.
The 1920s saw foreign oil companies begin operations throughout South America. Venezuela became the world's second largest oil producing nation.
Prosperity in the 1920s was not ubiquitous, however. The German Weimar Republic experienced a severe economic downturn as a result of the enormous debts it agreed to repay as part of the Treaty of Versailles. The economic crisis that resulted led to a devaluation of the Mark in 1923 and to severe economic problems. The economic hardships experienced by Germans during this period resulted in an environment conducive to the rise of the Nazi Party.
The 1920s were also characterized by the rise of radical political movements, especially in regions that were once part of empires. Communism spread as a consequence of the October Revolution and the Bolsheviks' victory in the Russian Civil War. Fear of the spread of Communism led to the emergence of Far Right political movements and Fascism in Europe. Economic problems contributed to the emergence of dictators in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, to include Józef Piłsudski in the Second Polish Republic, and Peter and Alexander Karađorđević in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
The devastating Wall Street Crash in October 1929 is generally viewed as a harbinger of the end of 1920s prosperity in North America and Europe.
Social history.
The Roaring Twenties brought about several novel and highly visible social and cultural trends. These trends, made possible by sustained economic prosperity, were most visible in major cities like New York, Chicago, Paris, Berlin and London. "Normalcy" returned to politics in the wake of hyper-emotional patriotism during World War I, jazz blossomed, and Art Deco peaked. For women, knee-length skirts and dresses became socially acceptable, as did bobbed hair with a marcel wave. The women who pioneered these trends were frequently referred to as flappers.
The era saw the large-scale adoption of automobiles, telephones, motion pictures and electricity, unprecedented industrial growth, accelerated consumer demand and aspirations, and significant changes in lifestyle and culture. The media began to focus on celebrities, especially sports heroes and movie stars. Large baseball stadiums were built in major U.S. cities, in addition to palatial cinemas. The decade also saw the advent of television, albeit on a very limited scale.
In most Western countries women gained the right to vote. The 1920s also marked the start of urban migration in the United States. By the end of the decade, the population in urban areas surpassed that of the population in rural areas.
Popular culture.
Fashion.
"Main article: 1920s in Western fashion"
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines listing the most prominent events of the decade:
1920 • 1921 • 1922 • 1923 • 1924 • 1925 • 1926 • 1927 • 1928 • 1929

</doc>
<doc id="34616" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34616" title="1912">
1912

1912 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34617" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34617" title="1913">
1913

1913 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34618" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34618" title="1901">
1901

1901 ()
will be .
Significance of 1901 for modern computers.
The date of Friday December 13 20:45:52 1901 is significant for modern computers because it is the earliest date representable with a signed 32-bit integer on systems that reference time in seconds since the Unix epoch. This corresponds to -2147483648 seconds from Thursday January 1 00:00:00 1970. For the same reason, many computers are also unable to represent an earlier date. For related reasons, many computer systems suffer from the Year 2038 problem. This is when the positive number of seconds since 1970 exceeds 2147483647 (01111111 11111111 11111111 11111111 in binary) and wraps to -2147483648. Hence the computer system erroneously displays or operates on the time Friday December 13 20:45:52 1901. In this way, the year 1900 is to the Year 2000 problem as the year 1901 is to the Year 2038 problem.

</doc>
<doc id="34619" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34619" title="1900s (decade)">
1900s (decade)

The 1900s (pronounced "nineteen-hundreds" or "nineteen-aughts") was a decade that began on January 1, 1900 and ended on December 31, 1909. The term "nineteen-hundreds" can also equally be used for the years 1900–1999 (see 1900s). The Edwardian era (1901–1910) covers a similar span of time.
Pronunciation varieties.
There are several main varieties of how individual years of the decade are pronounced in English. Using 1906 as an example, they are "nineteen-oh-six", "nineteen-six", and "nineteen-ought-six". Which variety is most prominent depends somewhat on global region and generation. In American English, "nineteen-oh-six" is the most common; "nineteen-six" is less common; "nineteen-ought-six" is recognized but not much used. In British English, "nineteen-six" is more common than it is in American English. In the post–World War II era through the 1990s, mentions of "nineteen-ought-six" or "ought-six" often distinctly connoted old-fashioned speech; for example, it was once used to add to the geriatric-humor effect in the dialogue of the Grampa Simpson character. The strength of the comedic effect diminished during the aughts of the next century, as the public grew used to questioning how to refer to an "ohs" or "aughts" decade. 
Assassinations.
The 1900s were marked by several notable assassinations and assassination attempts:
Economics.
The cost of an American . The cost of a Swedish postage stamp was 100SEK.
People.
Sports.
The Tour de France starts for the first time in 1903.
The first Indianapolis 500 mile race is run in 1911
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1900 • 1901 • 1902 • 1903 • 1904 • 1905 • 1906 • 1907 • 1908 • 1909
Further reading.
</dl>

</doc>
<doc id="34620" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34620" title="1828">
1828

The year 1828 (MDCCCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34621" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34621" title="1910s">
1910s

The 1910s (usually pronounced "nineteen-tens") was a decade that began on January 1, 1910, and ended on December 31, 1919. However most of its inhabitants called it the 1900s or the Edwardian era, like the previous decade, similar to how the first two eras of the 21st century are both called the 2000s. The 1910s represented the culmination of European militarism which had its beginnings during the second half of the 19th century. The conservative lifestyles during the first half of the decade, as well as the legacy of military alliances, was forever changed by the assassination, on June 28, 1914, of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the heir presumptive to the Austro-Hungarian throne. The murder triggered a chain of events in which, within 33 days, World War I broke out in Europe on August 1, 1914. The conflict dragged on until a truce was declared on November 11, 1918, leading to the controversial, one-sided Treaty of Versailles, which was signed on June 28, 1919.
The war's end triggered the abdication of various monarchies and the collapse of five of the last modern empires of Russia, Germany, China, Ottoman Turkey and Austria-Hungary, with the latter splintered into Austria, Hungary, southern Poland (who acquired most of their land in a war with Soviet Russia), Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, as well as the unification of Romania with Transylvania and Moldavia. However, each of these states (with the possible exception of Yugoslavia) had large German and Hungarian minorities, there creating some unexpected problems that would be brought to light in the next two decades. "(See Dissolution of Austro-Hungarian Empire: Successor States for better description of composition of names of successor countries/states following the splinter.)"
The decade was also a period of revolution in a number of countries. The Mexican Revolution spearheaded the trend in November 1910, which led to the ousting of dictator Porfirio Diaz, developing into a violent civil war that dragged on until mid-1920, not long after a new Mexican Constitution was signed and ratified. Russia also had a similar fate, since World War I led to a collapse in morale as well as to economic chaos. This atmosphere encouraged the establishment of Bolshevism, which was later renamed as communism. Like the Mexican Revolution, the Russian Revolution of 1917, known as the October Revolution, immediately turned to Russian Civil War that dragged until approximately late 1922.
Much of the music in these years was ballroom-themed. Many of the fashionable restaurants were equipped with dance floors. Prohibition in the United States began January 16, 1919, with the ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Assassinations.
The 1910s were marked by several notable assassinations:
Popular culture.
Visual Arts.
The 1913 Armory Show in New York City was a seminal event in the history of Modern Art. Innovative contemporaneous artists from Europe and the United States exhibited together in a massive group exhibition in New York City, and Chicago.
See also.
Timeline.
The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade:
1910 • 1911 • 1912 • 1913 • 1914 • 1915 • 1916 • 1917 • 1918 • 1919

</doc>
<doc id="34622" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34622" title="1944">
1944

1944 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, events of World War II have the "WWII" prefix.

</doc>
<doc id="34624" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34624" title="1945">
1945

1945 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, events of World War II have the "WWII" prefix.

</doc>
<doc id="34625" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34625" title="14th century">
14th century

As a means of recording the passage of time, the 14th century was the century which lasted from January 1, 1301, to December 31, 1400. Political and natural disaster and black death ravaged 4 khanates of the Mongolian Empire. Consequently, the Mongol court was driven out of China and retreated to Mongolia, the Ilkhanate collapsed in Persia, the Chaghatayid dissolved into two parts, and the Golden Horde lost its position as great power in Eastern Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="34626" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34626" title="1860s">
1860s

The 1860s were an extremely turbulent decade with numerous cultural, social, and political upheavals in Europe and America. Revolutions were prevalent in Germany and the Ottoman Empire. The abolition of slavery in America led to the breakdown of the Atlantic Slave Trade, which was already suffering from the abolition of slavery in most of Europe in the late 1820s and ’30s. In America, civil war between the Confederacy of the South and the Northern states led to massive deaths and the destruction of cities such as Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, Richmond, Virginia and Atlanta, Georgia. Sherman's march to the sea was one of the first times America experienced total war, and advancements in military technology, such as iron and steel warships, and the development and initial deployment of early machine guns added to the destruction. After the Civil War, turmoil continued in Reconstruction, with the rise of white supremacist organizations like the Ku Klux Klan and the issue of granting Civil Rights to freed blacks. 

</doc>
<doc id="34627" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34627" title="1788">
1788

Year 1788 (MDCCLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34628" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34628" title="First Century">
First Century

The First Century was the century that lasted from 1 to 100 according to the Julian calendar. It is often written as the First Century AD or First Century CE to distinguish it from the First Century BC (or BCE) which preceded it. The First Century is considered part of the "Classical era, epoch, or historical period".
During this period Europe, North Africa and the Near East fell under increasing domination by the Roman Empire, which continued expanding, most notably conquering Britain under the emperor Claudius (43). The reforms introduced by Augustus during his long reign stabilized the empire after the turmoil of the previous century's civil wars. Later in the century the Julio-Claudian dynasty, which had been founded by Augustus, came to an end with the death of Nero in 68. There followed the famous Year of Four Emperors, a brief period of civil war and instability, which was finally brought to an end by Vespasian, ninth Roman emperor, and founder of the Flavian dynasty. The Roman Empire generally experienced a period of prosperity and dominance in this period and the First Century is remembered as part of the Empire's golden age.
The First Century saw the appearance of Christianity, following the ministry and crucifixion of Jesus of Nazareth in the Roman province of Palestine.
China continued to be dominated by the Han Dynasty, despite a fourteen-year interruption by the Xin dynasty under Wang Mang. Han rule was restored in 23; Wang Mang's rule represents the watershed between the Western/Former Han and the Eastern/Later Han. The capital was also moved from Chang'an to Luoyang.
Inventions, discoveries, introductions.
Christianity.
According to the New Testament, during the reign of Tiberius, Jesus, a Jewish religious leader from Galilee, was crucified in Jerusalem on the charge of blasphemy for claiming to be the Son of God. But God raised him from the dead three days later, see Resurrection of Jesus. Over the next few decades his followers, following the Great Commission, including the apostle Paul, carried his message throughout the Greek-speaking regions of Asia Minor, eventually introducing it to Rome itself. Roman rulers began to persecute the new sect almost immediately (the emperor Nero accused the Christians of starting the fires that destroyed much of Rome in 64 AD), and would continue to do so for centuries, sometimes vigorously, and other times passively. Christian tradition records that all of Christ's apostles except John the Evangelist suffered martyrdom.
In the 4th century, Christianity was eventually taken up by the emperor Constantine, although one of his successors Julian the Apostate renounced it for paganism and again persecuted the Church. However, by the end of the 4th century, Emperor Theodosius I proclaimed Christianity as the state religion of the Roman Empire.

</doc>
<doc id="34629" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34629" title="1942">
1942

1942 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, events of World War II have the "WWII" prefix.
Births.
January.
January 5 

</doc>
<doc id="34630" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34630" title="1943">
1943

1943 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, events of World War II have the "WWII" prefix.
Births.
March.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34631" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34631" title="1946">
1946

1946 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34632" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34632" title="1941">
1941

1941 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, the events of World War II have the "WWII" acronym.

</doc>
<doc id="34633" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34633" title="13th century">
13th century

As a means of recording the passage of time, the 13th century was that century which lasted from 1201 through 1300 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. In the history of European culture, this period is considered part of the High Middle Ages, and after its conquests in Asia the Mongol Empire stretched from Eastern Asia to Eastern Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="34634" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34634" title="1787">
1787

Year 1787 (MDCCLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34635" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34635" title="1990">
1990

1990 ()
will be .
Important events of 1990 include the Reunification of Germany and Yemeni unification, the formal beginning of the Human Genome Project (finished in 2003), the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope, the separation of Namibia from South Africa, and the Baltic states declaring independence from the Soviet Union amidst Perestroika. Yugoslavia's communist regime collapses amidst increasing internal tensions and multiparty elections held within its constituent republics result in separatist governments being elected in most of the republics marking the beginning of the breakup of Yugoslavia. Also in this year began the crisis that would lead to the Gulf War in 1991 following Iraq invading and the largely internationally unrecognized annexation of Kuwait resulting in a crisis in the Persian Gulf involving the issue of the sovereignty of Kuwait and fears by Saudi Arabia over Iraqi aggression against their oil fields near Kuwait, this resulted in Operation Desert Shield being enacted with an international coalition of military forces being built up on the Kuwaiti-Saudi border with demands for Iraq to peacefully withdraw from Kuwait. Also in this year, Nelson Mandela was released from prison, and Margaret Thatcher resigned as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom after over 11 years.
1990 was an important year in the Internet's early history. In the fall of 1990, Tim Berners-Lee created the first web server and the foundation for the World Wide Web; it would be released to the public in 1991. 1990 also saw the official decommissioning of the ARPANET, a forerunner of the Internet system and the introduction of the first true search engine, Archie.
Due to the early 1990s recession that began that year and uncertainty due to the collapse of the communist regimes in Eastern Europe, birth rates in many countries stopped rising or fell dramatically in 1990. Rates of conception in China plummeted below replacement level around 1990 in the wake of the Tiananmen Square massacre. Birth rates in the Soviet Union began falling in the late 1980s. In most western countries the Echo Boom peaked in 1990; fertility rates declined thereafter.
"Encyclopædia Britannica", which ceased printing in 2012, saw its highest all time sales in 1990; 120,000 volumes were sold that year. The number of librarians in the United States also peaked around 1990.

</doc>
<doc id="34636" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34636" title="1996">
1996

1996 ()
will be .
1996 was designated as:
Deaths.
April.
April 6

</doc>
<doc id="34637" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34637" title="1905">
1905

1905 ()
will be .
As the second year of the massive Russo-Japanese War began, more than 100,000 died in the largest world battles of that era, and the war chaos lead to a revolution against the Tsar. (Shostakovich's 11th Symphony is subtitled "The Year 1905" to commemorate this.) Canada and the U.S. expanded west, with the Alberta and Saskatchewan provinces and the founding of Las Vegas. 1905 is also the "annus mirabilis" of Albert Einstein, who published papers which lay the foundations for quantum physics, introduced the special theory of relativity, explained Brownian motion, and established mass–energy equivalence.

</doc>
<doc id="34638" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34638" title="401(k)">
401(k)

In the United States, a 401(k) plan is the tax-qualified, defined-contribution pension account defined in subsection 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. Under the plan, retirement savings contributions are provided (and sometimes proportionately matched) by an employer, deducted from the employee's paycheck before taxation (therefore tax-deferred until withdrawn after retirement or as otherwise permitted by applicable law), and limited to a maximum pre-tax annual contribution of $18,000 (as of 2015).
Other employer-provided defined-contribution plans include 403(b) plans, for nonprofit institutions, and 457(b) plans for governmental employers. These plans are all established under section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 401(a) plans may provide total annual addition of $53,000 (as of 2015) per plan participant, including both employee and employer contributions.
History.
The section of the Internal Revenue Code that made 401(k) plans possible was enacted into law in 1978. It was intended to allow taxpayers a break on taxes on deferred income. In 1980, a benefits consultant named Ted Benna took note of the previously obscure provision and figured out that it could be used to create a simple, tax-advantaged way to save for retirement. The client he was working for at the time chose not to create a 401(k) plan. He later went on to install the first 401(k) plan at his own employer, The Johnson Companies (today doing business as Johnson Kendall & Johnson). At the time, employees could contribute twenty-five percent of their salary, up to $30,000 per year, to their employer's 401(k) plan.
Taxation.
With either pre-tax or after-tax contributions, earnings from investments in a 401(k) account (in the form of interest, dividends, or capital gains) are tax-deferred. The resulting compounding interest with delayed taxation is a major benefit of the 401(k) plan when held over long periods of time. Beginning in the 2006 tax year, employees have been allowed to designate contributions as a Roth 401(k) deduction. Similar to the provisions of a Roth IRA, these contributions are made on an after-tax basis.
For pre-tax contributions, the employee does not pay federal income tax on the amount of current income he or she defers to a 401(k) account, but does still pay the total 7.65% payroll taxes (social security and medicare). For example, a worker who otherwise earns $50,000 in a particular year and defers $3,000 into a 401(k) account that year only reports $47,000 in income on that year's tax return. Currently this would represent a near $750 term saving in taxes for a single worker, assuming the worker remained in the 25% marginal tax bracket and there were no other adjustments (e.g., deductions). The employee ultimately pays taxes on the money as he or she withdraws the funds, generally during retirement. The character of any gains (including tax-favored capital gains) is transformed into "ordinary income" at the time the money is withdrawn.
If the employee made after-tax contributions to the non-Roth 401(k) account, these amounts are commingled with the pre-tax funds and simply add to the non-Roth 401(k) basis. When distributions are made the taxable portion of the distribution will be calculated as the ratio of the non-Roth contributions to the total 401(k) basis. The remainder of the distribution is tax-free and not included in gross income for the year.
For accumulated after-tax contributions and earnings in a designated Roth account (Roth 401(k)), "qualified distributions" can be made tax-free. To qualify, distributions must be made more than 5 years after the first designated Roth contributions "and" not before the year in which the account owner turns age 59½, unless an exception applies as detailed in IRS code section 72(t). In the case of designated Roth contributions, the contributions being made on an after-tax basis means that the taxable income in the year of contribution is not decreased as it is with pre-tax contributions. Roth contributions are irrevocable and cannot be converted to pre-tax contributions at a later date. (In contrast to Roth individual retirement accounts (IRAs), where Roth contributions may be re characterized as pre-tax contributions.) Administratively, Roth contributions must be made to a separate account, and records must be kept that distinguish the amount of contribution and the corresponding earnings that are to receive Roth treatment.
Unlike the Roth IRA, there is no upper income limit capping eligibility for Roth 401(k) contributions. Individuals who find themselves disqualified from a Roth IRA may contribute to their Roth 401(k). Individuals who qualify for both can contribute the maximum statutory amounts into either or a combination of the two plans (including both catch-up contributions if applicable). Aggregate statutory annual limits set by the IRS will apply.
Withdrawal of funds.
The Internal Revenue Code imposes severe restrictions on withdrawals of pre-tax or Roth contributions while a person remains in service with the company and is under the age of 59½. Any withdrawal that is permitted before the age of 59½ is subject to an excise tax equal to ten percent of the amount distributed (on top of the ordinary income tax that has to be paid), including withdrawals to pay expenses due to a hardship, except to the extent the distribution does not exceed the amount allowable as a deduction under Internal Revenue Code section 213 to the employee for amounts paid during the taxable year for medical care (determined without regard to whether the employee itemizes deductions for such taxable year).
In any event any amounts are subject to normal taxation as ordinary income. The Internal Revenue Code generally defines hardship for this purpose as 
Some employers may disallow one, several, or all of the previous hardship causes. Someone wishing to withdraw from such a 401(k) plan would have to resign from their employer. To maintain the tax advantage for income deferred into a 401(k), the law stipulates the restriction that unless an exception applies, money must be kept in the plan or an equivalent tax deferred plan until the employee reaches 59½ years of age. Money that is withdrawn prior to the age of 59½ typically incurs a 10% penalty tax unless a further exception applies. This penalty is on top of the "ordinary income" tax that has to be paid on such a withdrawal. The exceptions to the 10% penalty include: the employee's death, the employee's total and permanent disability, separation from service in or after the year the employee reached age 55, substantially equal periodic payments under section 72(t), a qualified domestic relations order, and for deductible medical expenses (exceeding the 7.5% floor). This does not apply to the similar 457 plan.
Many plans also allow employees to take loans from their 401(k) to be repaid with after-tax funds at pre-defined interest rates. The interest proceeds then become part of the 401(k) balance. The loan itself is not taxable income nor subject to the 10% penalty as long as it is paid back in accordance with section 72(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. This section requires, among other things, that the loan be for a term no longer than 5 years (except for the purchase of a primary residence), that a "reasonable" rate of interest be charged, and that substantially equal payments (with payments made at least every calendar quarter) be made over the life of the loan. Employers, of course, have the option to make their plan's loan provisions more restrictive. When an employee does not make payments in accordance with the plan or IRS regulations, the outstanding loan balance will be declared in "default". A defaulted loan, and possibly accrued interest on the loan balance, becomes a taxable distribution to the employee in the year of default with all the same tax penalties and implications of a withdrawal.
These loans have been described as tax-disadvantaged, on the theory that the 401(k) contains before-tax dollars, but the loan is repaid with after-tax dollars. While this is precisely correct, the analysis is fundamentally flawed with regard to the loan principal amounts. From your perspective as the borrower, this is identical to a standard loan where you are not taxed when you get the loan, but you have to pay it back with taxed dollars. However, the interest portion of the loan repayments, which are essentially additional contributions to the 401(k), are made with after-tax funds but they do not increase the after-tax basis in the 401(k). Therefore, upon distribution/conversion of those funds the owner will have to pay taxes on those funds a second time.
Required minimum distributions (RMD).
Account owners must begin making distributions from their accounts by April 1 of the calendar year after turning age 70½ or April 1 of the calendar year after retiring, whichever is later. The amount of distributions is based on life expectancy according to the relevant factors from the appropriate IRS tables. There is an exception to minimum distribution for people still working once they reach that age. The exception only applies to the current plan they are participating in and does not apply if the account owner is a 5% owner of the business sponsoring the retirement plan. Required minimum distributions apply to both pretax and after-tax Roth contributions. Only a Roth IRA is not subject to minimum distribution rules. Other than the exception for continuing to work after age 70½ differs from the rules for IRA minimum distributions. The same penalty applies to the failure to make the minimum distribution. The penalty is 50% of the amount that should have been distributed, one of the most severe penalties the IRS applies. In response to the economic crisis, Congress suspended the RMD requirement for 2009.
Force-out.
Former employees ("terminated participants") can have their 401(k) accounts closed if their account balances are low; such a provision in the plan is referred to as a "force-out" provision. Almost 90% of plans have a force-out provision. As of March 2005, the limit for force-out provisions is a balance of $1,000—participants whose balance is over $1,000 cannot have their account closed. Before March 2005, the limit was $5,000.
Closing an account requires that the participant either roll-over the funds to an IRA, another 401(k) plan or take a distribution ("cash out"). 85% of those with balances of under $1,000 cash out, either voluntarily or due to a force-out provision.
Rollovers.
Rollovers between eligible retirement plans are accomplished in one of two ways: by a distribution to the participant and a subsequent rollover to another plan or by a direct rollover from plan to plan. Rollovers after a distribution to the participant must generally be accomplished within 60 days of the distribution. If the 60-day limit is not met, the rollover will be disallowed and the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income and the 10% penalty will apply, if applicable. The same rules and restrictions apply to rollovers from plans to IRAs.
Direct rollovers.
A direct rollover from an eligible retirement plan to another eligible retirement plan is not taxable, regardless of the age of the participant.
Traditional to Roth Conversions.
In 2013 the IRS began allowing conversions of existing Traditional 401(k) contributions to Roth 401(k). In order to do so, an employee's company plan must offer both a Traditional and Roth option and explicitly permit such a conversion.
Technical details.
Contribution deferral limits.
There is a maximum limit on the total yearly "employee" pre-tax or Roth salary deferral into the plan. This limit, known as the "402(g) limit", was $15,500 for the year 2008, $16,500 for 2009–2011, $17,000 for 2012, $17,500 for 2013-2014 and $18,000 for 2015. For future years, the limit may be indexed for inflation, increasing in increments of $500. Employees who are 50 years old or over at any time during the year are now allowed additional pre-tax "catch up" contributions of up to $5,000 for 2008, $5,500 for 2009–2014 and $6,000 for 2015. The limit for future "catch up" contributions may also be adjusted for inflation in increments of $500. In eligible plans, employees can elect to contribute on a pre-tax basis or as a Roth 401(k) contribution, or a combination of the two, but the total of those two contributions amounts must not exceed the contribution limit in a single calendar year. This limit does not apply to post-tax non-Roth elections.
If the employee contributes more than the maximum pre-tax/Roth limit to 401(k) accounts in a given year, the excess as well as the deemed earnings for those contributions must be withdrawn or corrected by April 15 of the following year. This violation most commonly occurs when a person switches employers mid-year and the latest employer does not know to enforce the contribution limits on behalf of their employee. If this violation is noticed too late, the employee will not only be required to pay tax on the excess contribution amount the year was earned, the tax will effectively be doubled as the late corrective distribution is required to be reported again as income along with the earnings on such excess in the year the late correction is made.
Plans which are set up under section 401(k) can also have employer contributions that cannot exceed other regulatory limits. Employer matching contributions can be made on behalf of designated Roth contributions, but the employer match must be made on a pre-tax basis.
Some plans also have a profit-sharing provision where employers make additional contributions to the account and may or may not require matching contributions by the employee. These additional contributions may or may not require a matching employee contribution to earn them. These profit-sharing contributions plus the matching contributions both cannot exceed 25% of the employee's pre-tax compensation. As with the matching funds, these contributions are also made on a pre-tax basis.
There is also a maximum 401(k) contribution limit that applies to all employee and employer 401(k) contributions in a calendar year. This limit is the section 415 limit, which is the lesser of 100% of the employee's total pre-tax compensation or $44,000 for 2006, $45,000 for 2007, $46,000 for 2008, $49,000 for 2009–2011, $50,000 for 2012, $51,000 for 2013, $52,000 for 2014, and $53,000 for 2015. For employees over 50, the catch-up contribution limit is also added to the 415 limit.
Governmental employers in the US (that is, federal, state, county, and city governments) are currently barred from offering 401(k) plans unless they were established before May 1986. Governmental organizations instead can set up a section 457(b).
Contribution deadline.
For a corporation, or LLC taxed as a corporation, contributions must be made by the end of a calendar year. For a sole proprietorship, partnership, or an LLC taxed as a sole proprietorship, the deadline for depositing contributions is generally the personal tax filing deadline (April 15, or September 15 if an extension was filed).
Highly compensated employees (HCE).
To help ensure that companies extend their 401(k) plans to low-paid employees, an IRS rule limits the maximum deferral by the company's highly compensated employees (HCEs) based on the average deferral by the company's non-highly compensated employees (NHCEs). If the less compensated employees save more for retirement, then the HCEs are allowed to save more for retirement. This provision is enforced via "non-discrimination testing". Non-discrimination testing takes the deferral rates of HCEs and compares them to NHCEs. In 2008, an HCE was defined as an employee with compensation greater than $100,000 in 2007, or as an employee that owned more than 5% of the business at any time during the year or the preceding year. In addition to the $100,000 limit for determining
HCEs, employers can elect to limit the top-paid group of employees to the top 20% of employees ranked by compensation. That is, for plans with the first day of the plan-year in the 2007 calendar year, HCEs are employees who earned more than $100,000 in gross compensation (also known as 'Medicare wages') in the prior year. For example, most testing done in 2009 was for the 2008 plan-year, which compared 2007 plan-year gross compensation to the $100,000 threshold in order to determine who was an HCE and who was an NHCE. The threshold became $110,000 in 2010 and it did not change for 2011.
For 2012, 2013 and 2014, the threshold increased from $110,000 to $115,000.
The average deferral percentage (ADP) of all HCEs as a group cannot exceed 2 percentage points greater than all NHCEs as a group. This is known as the ADP test. When a plan fails the ADP test, it essentially has two options to come into compliance. A return of excess can be given to the HCEs to lower the HCE ADP to a passing level, or it can process a "qualified non-elective contribution" (QNEC) to some or all of the NHCEs in order to raise the NHCE ADP to a passing level. A return of excess requires the plan to send a taxable distribution to the HCEs (or reclassify regular contributions as catch-up contributions subject to the annual catch-up limit for those HCEs over 50) by March 15 of the year following the failed test. A QNEC must be vested immediately.
The annual contribution percentage (ACP) test is similarly performed but also includes employer matching and employee after-tax contributions. ACPs do not use the simple 2% threshold, and include other provisions which can allow the plan to "shift" excess passing rates from the ADP over to the ACP. A failed ACP test is likewise addressed through return of excess, or a QNEC or qualified match (QMAC).
There are a number of "safe harbor" provisions that can allow a company to be exempted from the ADP test. This includes making a "safe harbor" employer contribution to employees' accounts. Safe harbor contributions can take the form of a match (generally totaling 4% of pay) or a non-elective profit sharing (totaling 3% of pay). Safe harbor 401(k) contributions must be 100% vested at all times with immediate eligibility for employees. There are other administrative requirements within the safe harbor, such as requiring the employer to notify all eligible employees of the opportunity to participate in the plan, and restricting the employer from suspending participants for any reason other than due to a hardship withdrawal.
Automatic enrollment.
Employers are allowed to automatically enroll their employees in 401(k) plans, requiring employees to actively opt out if they do not want to participate (traditionally, 401(k)s required employees to opt in). Companies offering such automatic 401(k)s must choose a default investment fund and savings rate. Employees who are enrolled automatically will become investors in the default fund at the default rate, although they may select different funds and rates if they choose, or even opt out completely.
Automatic 401(k)s are designed to encourage high participation rates among employees. Therefore, employers can attempt to enroll non-participants as often as once per year, requiring those non-participants to opt out each time if they do not want to participate. Employers can also choose to escalate participants' default contribution rate, encouraging them to save more.
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 made automatic enrollment a safer option for employers. Prior to the Pension Protection Act, employers were held responsible for investment losses as a result of such automatic enrollments. The Pension Protection Act established a safe harbor for employers in the form of a "Qualified Default Investment Alternative", an investment plan that, if chosen by the employer as the default plan for automatically enrolled participants, relieves the employer of financial liability. Under Department of Labor regulations, three main types of investments qualify as QDIAs: lifecycle funds, balanced funds, and managed accounts. QDIAs provide sponsors with fiduciary relief similar to the relief that applies when participants affirmatively elect their investments.
Fees.
401(k) plans charge fees for administrative services, investment management services, and sometime outside consulting services. They can be charged to the employer, the plan participants or to the plan itself and the fees can be allocated on a per participant basis, per plan, or as a percentage of the plan's assets. For 2011, the average total administrative and management fees on a 401(k) plan was 0.78 percent or approximately $250 per participant.
Plans for certain small businesses or sole proprietorships.
The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA) made 401(k) plans more beneficial to the self-employed. The two key changes enacted related to the allowable "Employer" deductible contribution, and the "Individual" IRC-415 contribution limit.
Prior to EGTRRA, the maximum tax-deductible contribution to a 401(k) plan was 15% of eligible pay (reduced by the amount of salary deferrals). Without EGTRRA, an incorporated business person taking $100,000 in salary would have been limited in Y2004 to a maximum contribution of $15,000. EGTRRA raised the deductible limit to 25% of eligible pay without reduction for salary deferrals. Therefore, that same businessperson in Y2008 can make an "elective deferral" of $15,500 plus a profit sharing contribution of $25,000 (i.e. 25%), and—if this person is over age 50—make a catch-up contribution of $5,000 for a total of $45,500. For those eligible to make "catch-up" contribution, and with salary of $122,000 or higher, the maximum possible total contribution in 2008 would be $51,000. To take advantage of these higher contributions, many vendors now offer Solo 401(k) plans or Individual(k) plans, which can be administered as a Self-Directed 401(k), allowing for investment into real estate, mortgage notes, tax liens, private companies, and virtually any other investment.
Note: an unincorporated business person is subject to slightly different calculation. The government mandates calculation of profit sharing contribution as 25% of "net self-employment (Schedule C) income". Thus on $100,000 of self-employment income, the contribution would be 20% of the gross self-employment income, 25% of the net after the contribution of $20,000.
Rollovers as business start-ups (ROBS).
ROBS is an arrangement in which prospective business owners use their 401(k) retirement funds to pay for new business start-up costs. ROBS is an acronym from the United States Internal Revenue Service for the IRS ROBS Rollovers as Business Start-Ups Compliance Project.
ROBS plans, while not considered an abusive tax avoidance transaction, are questionable because they may solely benefit one individual – the individual who rolls over his or her existing retirement 401(k) withdrawal funds to the ROBS plan in a tax-free transaction. The ROBS plan then uses the rollover assets to purchase the stock of the new business. A C corporation must be set up in order to roll the 401(k) withdrawal.
Other countries.
Even though the term "401(k)" is a reference to a specific provision of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code section 401, it has become so well known that it has been used elsewhere as a generic term to describe analogous legislation. For example, in October 2001, Japan adopted legislation allowing the creation of "Japan-version 401(k)" accounts even though no provision of the relevant Japanese codes is in fact called "section 401(k)."
The term is not used in the UK, where analogous pension arrangements are known as personal pension schemes.
Risk.
Unlike defined benefit ERISA plans or banking institution savings accounts, there is no government insurance for assets held in 401(k) accounts. Plans of sponsors experiencing financial difficulties, sometimes have funding problems. Fortunately, the bankruptcy laws give a high priority to sponsor funding liability. In moving between jobs, this should be a consideration by a plan participant in whether to leave assets in the old plan or roll over the assets to a new employer plan or to an individual retirement arrangement (an IRA). Fees charged by IRA providers can be substantially less than fees charged by employer plans and typically offer a far wider selection of investment vehicles than employer plans.

</doc>
<doc id="34639" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34639" title="1903">
1903

1903 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34640" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34640" title="1980">
1980

1980 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34641" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34641" title="1863">
1863

Year 1863 (MDCCCLXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34642" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34642" title="397">
397

Year 397 (CCCXCVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesarius and Atticus (or, less frequently, year 1150 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 397 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34643" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34643" title="4th century">
4th century

 As a means of recording the passage of time, the 4th century (per the Julian calendar and Anno Domini/Common era) was that century which lasted from 301 to 400. In the West, the early part of the century was shaped by Constantine the Great, who became the first Roman emperor to convert to Christianity. Gaining sole reign of the empire, he is also noted for re-establishing a single imperial capital, choosing the site of ancient Byzantium in 330 (over of the current capitals, which had effectively been changed by Diocletian's reforms to Milan in the West, and Nicomedeia in the East) to build the city soon called Nova Roma (New Rome); it was later renamed Constantinople in his honor.
The last emperor to control both the eastern and western halves of the empire was Theodosius I. As the century progressed after his death it became increasingly apparent that the empire had changed in many ways since the time of Augustus. The two emperor system originally established by Diocletian in the previous century fell into regular practice, and the east continued to grow in importance as a centre of trade and imperial power, while Rome itself diminished greatly in importance due to its location far from potential trouble spots, like Central Europe and the East. Late in the century Christianity became the official state religion, and the empire's old pagan culture began to disappear. General prosperity was felt throughout this period, but recurring invasions by Germanic tribes plagued the empire from AD 376 onward. These early invasions marked the beginning of the end for the Western Roman Empire.
According to archaeologists, sufficient archaeological correlates of state-level societies coalesced in the 4th century to show the existence in Korea of the Three Kingdoms (AD 300/400–668) of Baekje, Goguryeo, and Silla.

</doc>
<doc id="34644" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34644" title="12th century">
12th century

As a means of recording the passage of time, the 12th century is the period from 1101 to 1200 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. In the history of European culture, this period is considered part of the High Middle Ages and is sometimes called the Age of the Cistercians. In Song Dynasty China an invasion by Jurchens caused a political schism of north and south. The Khmer Empire of Cambodia flourished during this century, while the Fatimids of Egypt were overtaken by the Ayyubid dynasty.

</doc>
<doc id="34645" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34645" title="11th century">
11th century

As a means of recording the passage of time, the 11th century is the period from 1001 to 1100 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era, and the 1st century of the 2nd millennium.
In the history of European culture, this period is considered the early part of the High Middle Ages. There was a sudden decline of Byzantine power and rise of Norman domination over much of Europe, along with the prominent role in Europe of notably influential popes. In Northern Italy, a growth of population in urban centers gave rise to early organized capitalism and more sophisticated, commercialized culture by the late 11th century.
In Song Dynasty China and the classical Islamic world, this century marked the high point for both classical Chinese civilization, science and technology, and classical Islamic science, philosophy, technology and literature.
Rival political factions at the Song Dynasty court created strife amongst the leading statesmen and ministers of the empire. Chola-era India and Fatimid-era Egypt, had reached their zenith in military might and international influence. The Western Chalukya Empire (the Chola's rival) also rose to power by the end of the century. In this century the Turkish Seljuk dynasty comes to power in the Middle East over the now fragmented Abbasid realm, while the first of the Crusades were waged towards the close of the century. In Japan, the Fujiwara clan continued to dominate the affairs of state. In the Americas, the Toltec and Mixtec civilizations flourished in central America, along with the Huari Culture of South America and the Mississippian culture of North America. In Ukraine, there was the golden age for the principality of Kievan Rus. In Korea, the Goryeo Kingdom flourished and faced external threats from the Liao Dynasty (Manchuria). In Vietnam, the Lý Dynasty began, while in Myanmar the Pagan Kingdom reached its height of political and military power.
Overview.
In European history, the 11th century is regarded as the beginning of the High Middle Ages, an age subsequent to the Early Middle Ages. The century began while the "translatio imperii" of 962 was still somewhat novel and ended in the midst of the Investiture Controversy. It saw the final Christianisation of Scandinavia and the emergence of the Peace and Truce of God movements, the Gregorian Reforms, and the Crusades which revitalised a church and a papacy that had survived tarnished by the tumultuous 10th century. In 1054, the Great Schism rent the church in two, however.
In Germany, the century was marked by the ascendancy of the Holy Roman Emperors, who hit their high-water mark under the Salians.
In Italy, it opened with the integration of the kingdom into the empire and the royal palace at Pavia was summoned in 1024. By the end of the century, Lombard and Byzantine rule in the Mezzogiorno had been usurped by the Normans and the power of the territorial magnates was being replaced by that of the citizens of the cities in the north.
In Britain, it saw the transformation of Scotland into a single, more unified and centralised kingdom and the Norman conquest of England in 1066. The social transformations wrought in these lands brought them into the fuller orbit of European feudal politics.
In France, it saw the nadir of the monarchy and the zenith of the great magnates, especially the dukes of Aquitaine and Normandy, who could thus foster such distinctive contributions of their lands as the pious warrior who conquered Britain, Italy, and the East and the impious peacelover, the troubadour, who crafted out of the European vernacular its first great literary themes. There were also the first figures of the intellectual movement known as Scholasticism, which emphasized dialectic arguments in disputes of Christian theology as well as classical philosophy.
In Spain, the century opened with the successes of the last caliphs of Córdoba and ended in the successes of the Almoravids. In between was a period of Christian unification under Navarrese hegemony and success in the Reconquista against the taifa kingdoms that replaced the fallen caliphate.
In China, there was a triangular affair of continued war and peace settlements between the Song Dynasty, the Tanguts-led Western Xia in the northwest, and the Khitans of the Liao Dynasty in the northeast. Meanwhile, opposing political factions evolved at the Song imperial court of Kaifeng. The political reformers at court, called the New Policies Group (新法, Xin Fa), were led by Emperor Shenzong of Song and the Chancellors Fan Zhongyan and Wang Anshi, while the political conservatives were led by Chancellor Sima Guang and Empress Dowager Gao, regent of the young Emperor Zhezong of Song. Heated political debate and sectarian intrigue followed, while political enemies were often dismissed from the capital to govern frontier regions in the deep south where malaria was known to be very fatal to northern Chinese people (see History of the Song Dynasty). This period also represents a high point in classical Chinese science and technology, with figures such as Su Song and Shen Kuo, as well as the age where the matured form of the Chinese pagoda was accomplished in Chinese architecture.
In India, the Chola Dynasty reached its height of naval power under leaders such as Rajaraja Chola I and Rajendra Chola I, dominating southern India (Tamil Nadu), Sri Lanka, and regions of South East Asia. They also sent raids into what is now Thailand.
In Japan, the Fujiwara clan dominated central politics by acting as imperial regents, controlling the actions of the Emperor of Japan, who acted merely as a 'puppet monarch' during the Heian period.
In the Middle East, the Fatimid Empire of Egypt reached its zenith only to face steep decline, much like the Byzantine Empire in the first half of the century. The Seljuks came to prominence while the Abbasid caliphs held traditional titles without real, tangible authority in state affairs.
In Nigeria, formation of city states, kingdoms and empires, including Hausa kingdoms and Borno dynasty in north, Oyo and Benin kingdoms in south.
In Korea, the rulers of the Goryeo Kingdom were able to concentrate more central authority into their own hands than in that of the nobles, and were able to fend off two Khitan invasions with their armies.

</doc>
<doc id="34646" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34646" title="1859">
1859

Year 1859 (MDCCCLIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34647" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34647" title="1998">
1998

1998 ()
will be .
1998 was designated as:

</doc>
<doc id="34648" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34648" title="1963">
1963

1963 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34649" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34649" title="1907">
1907

1907 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34650" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34650" title="1906">
1906

"This article is about the year 1906. For other uses, see 1906 (disambiguation)."
1906 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34651" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34651" title="1904">
1904

1904 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34652" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34652" title="1902">
1902

1902 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34653" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34653" title="1900">
1900

Year 1900 (MCM) was an exceptional common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. It was not a leap year as a result of the second finest adjustment of the Gregorian calendar where leap years are eliminated in centennial years not evenly divisible by 400 (Source: The Discoverers, Boorstin, page 9). As a result, the Julian calendar was 12 days behind the Gregorian until Wednesday, February 28 (O.S. February 16) and has been 13 days behind since Thursday, March 1 (O.S. February 17). It was the 1900th year of the Anno Domini or the Common Era designation, the 900th year of the 2nd millennium, the last year of the 19th century and the first year of the 1900s.

</doc>
<doc id="34654" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34654" title="1974">
1974

 
1974 ()
will be .
Events.
April.
April – The world population reaches 4 billion people estimated by the United States Census Bureau.
Births.
November.
 
References.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34655" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34655" title="1968">
1968

1968 ()
will be . This is the year of the Protests of 1968.

</doc>
<doc id="34656" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34656" title="1929">
1929

1929 ()
will be .
Summary.
This year marked the end of a period known in American history as the Roaring Twenties after the Wall Street Crash of 1929 ushered in a worldwide Great Depression. In the Americas, an agreement was brokered to end the Cristero War, a Catholic counter-revolution in Mexico. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, a British high court, ruled that Canadian women are persons in the "Edwards v. Canada (Attorney General)" case. The 1st Academy Awards for film were held in Los Angeles, while the Museum of Modern Art opened in New York City. The Peruvian Air Force was created.
In Asia, the Republic of China and the Soviet Union engaged in a minor conflict after the Chinese seized full control of the Manchurian Chinese Eastern Railway, which ended with a resumption of joint administration. In the Soviet Union, General Secretary Joseph Stalin expelled Leon Trotsky and adopted a policy of collectivization. The Grand Trunk Express began service in India. rioting occurred between Muslims and Jews in Jerusalem over access to the Western Wall took place in the Middle East. The centenary of Western Australia was celebrated.
The Kellogg–Briand Pact, a treaty renouncing war as an instrument of national policy, went into effect. In Europe, the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy signed the Lateran Treaty. The Idionymon law was passed in Greece to outlaw political dissent. Spain hosted the Ibero-American Exposition which featured pavilions from Latin American countries. The German airship LZ 127 "Graf Zeppelin" flew around the world in 21 days.
Middle East, Asia, and Pacific Isles.
On August 16 of this year the 1929 Palestine riots broke out between Palestinians and Jews over control of the Western Wall. The rioting, initiated in part when British police tore down a screen the Jews had constructed in front of the Wall, continued until the end of the month. In total, 133 Jews and 116 Palestinians were killed. Two of the more famous incidents occurring during these riots were the August 23–24 1929 Hebron massacre, in which almost 70 Jews were killed by Palestinians and the remaining Jews are forced to leave Hebron. The Palestinians had been told that Jews were killing Palestinians. Jews would not return to Hebron until after the Six-Day War in 1967. The other major clash was the 1929 Safed massacre, in which 18–20 Jews were killed by Palestinians in Safed in similar fashion. Elsewhere in the Middle East, Iraq took a big step toward gaining independence from the British. The Iraqi government had, since the end of World War I and the beginning of the British Mandate in the Middle East, consistently resisted British hegemony. In September, Great Britain announced it would support Iraq's inclusion in the League of Nations, signaling the beginning of the end of their direct control of the region.
Early in 1929, the Afghan leader King Amanullah lost power through revolution and civil war to Habibullāh Kalakāni. Habibullāh's rule, however, only lasted nine months. Nadir Shah replaced him in October, starting a line of monarchs which would last 40 years. In India, a general strike in Bombay continued throughout the year despite efforts by the British. On December 29, the All India Congress in Lahore declared Indian independence from Britain, something it had threatened to do if Britain did not grant India dominion status. China and Russia engaged in a minor conflict after China seized full control of the Manchurian Chinese Eastern Railway. Russia counterattacked and took the cities of Hailar and Manchouli before issuing an ultimatum demanding joint control of the railway to be reinstated. The Chinese agreed to the terms on November 26. The Japanese would later see this defeat as a sign of Chinese weakness, leading to their taking control of Manchuria. The Far East began to experience economic problems late in the year as the effects of the Great Depression began to spread. Southeast Asia was especially hard hit as its exports (spice, rubber, and other commodities) were more sensitive to economic problems. In the Pacific, on December 28 – "Black Saturday" in Samoa – New Zealand colonial police killed 11 unarmed demonstrators, an event which led the Mau movement to demand independence for Samoa.
Europe.
Western.
In 1929, the Fascist Party in Italy tightened its control. National education policy took a major step towards being completely taken over by the agenda of indoctrination. In that year, the Fascist government took control of the authorization of all textbooks, all secondary school teachers were required to take an oath of loyalty to Fascism, and children began to be taught that they owed the same loyalty to Fascism as they did to God.
On February 11, Mussolini signed the Lateran Treaty, making Vatican City a sovereign state. On July 25, Pope Pius XI emerged from the Vatican and entered St. Peter's Square in a huge procession witnessed by about 250,000 persons, thus ending nearly 60 years of papal self-imprisonment within the Vatican. Italy used the diplomatic prestige associated with this successful agreement to adopt a more aggressive foreign policy. Germany experienced a major turning point in this year due to the economic crash. The country had experienced prosperity under the government of the Weimar Republic until foreign investors withdrew their German interests. This began the crumbling of the Republican government in favor of Nazism. In 1929, the number of unemployed reached three million. On July 27, the Geneva Convention, held in Switzerland, addressed the treatment of prisoners of war in response to problems encountered during World War I.
On May 31, the British general election returned a hung parliament yet again, with the Liberals in position to determine who would have power. These elections were known as the "Flapper" elections due to the fact that it was the first British election in which women under 30 could vote. A week after the vote, on June 7 the Conservatives conceded power rather than ally with the Liberals. Ramsay MacDonald founded a new Labour government the next day.
1929 is regarded as a turning point by French historians, who point out that it was last year in which prosperity was felt before the effects of the Great Depression. The Third Republic had been in power since before World War I. On July 24,French prime minister Raymond Poincaré resigned for medical reasons; he was succeeded by Aristide Briand. Briand adopted a foreign policy of both peace and defensive fortification. The Kellogg–Briand Pact, renouncing war as an instrument of foreign policy, went into effect in this year (it was first signed in Paris in 1928 by most leading world powers). The French began work on the Maginot Line in this year, as a defense against a possible German attack, and on September 5 Briand presented a plan for the "United States of Europe". On October 22, Briand was replaced as Prime Minister by André Tardieu. Primo de Rivera's dictatorship in Spain experienced growing dissatisfaction among students and academics, as well as businessmen who blamed the government for recent economic woes. Many called for a fascist regime, like that in Italy.
Eastern.
In May, Joseph Stalin consolidated his power in the Soviet Union by sending Leon Trotsky into exile. The only country that would grant Trotsky asylum was Turkey, in return for his help during Turkey's civil war. He and his family left the USSR aboard ship on February 12. Stalin turned on his former political ally, Nikolai Bukharin, who was the last real threat to his power. By the end of the year Bukharin had been defeated. Once Stalin was in power, he turned his former support for Lenin's New Economic Policy into opposition. In November, Stalin declared that it "The Year of the Great Breakthrough" and stated that the country would focus on industrial programs as well as on collectivizing the grain supply. He hoped to surpass the West not only in agriculture, but in industry. Millions of Soviet farmers were removed from their private farms, their property was collected, and they were moved to state-owned farms. Stalin emphasized in 1929 a campaign demonizing kulaks as a plague on society. Kulak property was taken and they were deported by cattle train to areas of frozen tundra.
The timber market in Finland began to decline in 1929 due to the Great Depression, as well as the Soviet Union's entrance into the market. Financial and political problems culminated in the birth of the fascist Lapua Movement on November 23 in a demonstration in Lapua. The movement's stated aim was Finnish democracy and anti-communism. The Finnish legislature received heavy pressure to remove basic rights from Communist groups. Politics in Lithuania was heated, as President Voldemaras was unpopular in some quarters, and survived an assassination attempt in Kaunas. Later, while attending a meeting of the League of Nations, he was ousted in a coup by President Smetona, who made himself dictator. Upon Voldemaras' removal from office, Geležinis Vilkas went underground and received aid and encouragement in its activities from Germany. Yugoslavia was renamed the "Kingdom of Yugoslavia" as King Alexander sought to unite the Balkans under his rule. The state's new Monarchy replaced the old parliament, which had been dominated by Serbs.
North America.
In October 1929, the British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council overturned a ruling by the Supreme Court of Canada that women could not be members of the legislature. This case, which came to be known as the Persons Case, had important ramifications not just for the rights of women but because in overturning the case, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council engendered a radical change in the Canadian judicial approach to the Canadian constitution, an approach that has come to be known as the "living tree doctrine". The five women who initiated the case are known in Canada as the Famous Five. In November, the 1929 Grand Banks earthquake occurred off the south coast of Newfoundland in the Atlantic Ocean. It registered as a Richter magnitude 7.2 submarine earthquake centered on Grand Banks, broke 12 submarine transatlantic telegraph cables and triggered a tsunami that destroyed many south coast communities in the Burin Peninsula area, killing 28 (as of 1997, Canada's most lethal earthquake).
The Mexican Cristero War continued in 1929 as clerical forces attempted an assassination of the provisional president in a train bombing in February. The attempt failed. Plutarco Calles, at the center of power for the anti-clerics, continued to gather power in Mexico City. His government was considered an enemy to more conservative Mexicans who held to traditional forms of government and more religious control. Calles founded the National Revolutionary Party early in the year to increase his power; a party which was, ironically, seen by foreigners as fascist and which was in opposition to the Mexican Right. A special election was held in this year, which Jose Vasconselos lost to Ortiz Rubio. By this time, the war had ended. The last group of rebels was defeated on June 4, and in the same month US Ambassador Dwight Morrow initiated talks between parties. On June 21 an agreement was brokered ending the Cristero War. On June 27, church bells rang and mass was held publicly for the first time in three years. The agreement heavily favored the government, as priests were required to register with the government and religion was banned from schools.
The major event of the year for the United States was the stock market crash on Wall Street, which was to have international effects. On September 3, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) peaked at 381.17, a height it would not reach again until November 1954. Then, from October 24–October 29, stock prices suffered three multi-digit percentage drops, wiping out more than $30 billion from the New York Stock Exchange (10 times greater than the annual budget of the federal government). On December 3 U.S. President Herbert Hoover announced to the U.S. Congress that the worst effects of the recent stock market crash were behind the nation, and that the American people had regained faith in the economy.
Literature, arts, and entertainment.
Literature of the time reflected the memories many harbored of the horrors of World War I. A major seller was "All Quiet on the Western Front" by Erich Maria Remarque. Remarque was a German who had fought in the war at age eighteen and been wounded in the Third Battle of Ypres. He stated that he intended the book to tell the story "of a generation of men who, even though they may have escaped its shells, were destroyed by the war." Another 1929 book reflecting on World War I was Ernest Hemingway's "A Farewell to Arms", as well as "Good-Bye to All That" by Robert Graves. In lighter media, a few stars of the comic industry made their debut, including "Tintin", a comic book character created by Hergé, who would appear in over 200 million comic books in 60 languages. "Popeye", another comic strip character created by Elzie Crisler Segar, also appeared in this year.
Within the film industry, on May 16 the 1st Academy Awards were presented at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, with "Wings" winning Best Picture. Also, "Hallelujah!" became the first Hollywood film to contain an entirely black cast, and "Atlantic", a German film about the Titanic, was the first sound-on-film movie. The arts were in the midst of the Modernist movement, as Pablo Picasso painted two cubist works, "Woman in a Garden" and "Nude in an Armchair", during this year. The surrealist painters Salvador Dalí and René Magritte completed several works, including "The First Days of Spring" and "The Treachery of Images". On November 7 in New York City, the Museum of Modern Art opened to the public. The latest in modern architecture was also represented by the Barcelona Pavilion in Spain, and the Royal York Hotel in Toronto, at its completion the tallest building in the British Empire.
Science and technology.
The year saw several advances in technology and exploration. On June 27 the first public demonstration of color TV was held by H. E. Ives and his colleagues at Bell Telephone Laboratories in New York. The first images were a bouquet of roses and an American flag. A mechanical system was used to transmit 50-line color television images between New York and Washington. The BBC broadcast a television transmission for the first time. By November, Vladimir Zworykin had taken out the first patent for color television. On November 29, Bernt Balchen, U.S. Admiral Richard Byrd, Captain Ashley McKinley, and Harold June, became the first to fly over the South Pole. Within the year, Britain, Australia and New Zealand began a joint Antarctic Research Expedition, and the German airship "Graf Zeppelin" began a round-the-world flight (ended August 29). This year Ernst Schwarz describes Bonobo ("Pan paniscus") as a different species from chimpanzee ("Pan troglodites"), both closely related phylogenetically to human beings.
Births.
January–April.
 
Deaths.
July–December.
"date unknown"

</doc>
<doc id="34657" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34657" title="1966 FIFA World Cup Final">
1966 FIFA World Cup Final

The 1966 FIFA World Cup Final was the final match in the 1966 FIFA World Cup, the eighth football World Cup and one of the most controversial finals ever. The match was contested by England and West Germany on 30 July 1966 at Wembley Stadium in London, and had an attendance of 96,924. 
England won 4–2 after extra time to win the Jules Rimet Trophy. The England team became known as the "wingless wonders", on account of their then-unconventional narrow attacking formation, described at the time as a 4–3–3. The match is remembered for England's only World Cup trophy, Geoff Hurst's hat-trick – the only one ever scored in a World Cup Final – and the controversial third goal awarded to England by referee Gottfried Dienst and linesman Tofiq Bahramov.
Road to Wembley.
Both teams were strong throughout the tournament. Each won all but one of their three matches in the group stages, which they both drew. West Germany tied against Argentina, while England drew against Uruguay, at that time tied for the number of World Cups won with Italy and Brazil. The German team conceded but two goals before the final, and England did not concede at all until their semi-final against Portugal.
Match.
Summary.
Normal time.
England, managed by Alf Ramsey and captained by Bobby Moore, won the toss and elected to kick off. After 12 minutes, Siegfried Held sent a cross into the English penalty area which Ray Wilson misheaded to Helmut Haller, who got his shot on target. Jackie Charlton and goalkeeper Gordon Banks failed to deal with the shot which went in making it 1–0 to West Germany.
In the 19th minute, Wolfgang Overath conceded a free kick, which Moore took immediately, floating a cross into the West German area, where Geoff Hurst rose unchallenged and levelled the scores with a downward glancing header. The teams were level at half-time, and after 77 minutes England won a corner. Alan Ball delivered the ball to Geoff Hurst whose deflected shot from the edge of the area found Martin Peters. He produced the final shot, beating the West German keeper from eight yards to make the score 2–1 to England.
Germany pressed for an equaliser in the closing moments, and in the 89th minute Jack Charlton conceded a free kick for climbing on Uwe Seeler as they both went up for a header. The kick was taken by Lothar Emmerich, who struck it into George Cohen in the wall; the rebound fell to Held, who shot across the face of goal and into the body of Karl-Heinz Schnellinger. The ball deflected across the England six-yard box, wrong-footing the England defence and allowing Wolfgang Weber to level the score at 2–2 and force the match into extra time. Banks protested that the ball had struck Schnellinger on the arm, and reiterated the claim in his 2002 autobiography, but replays showed that it actually struck Schnellinger on the back.
Extra time.
England pressed forward and created several chances. In particular, with five minutes gone, Bobby Charlton struck the post and sent another shot just wide. With 11 minutes of extra time gone, Alan Ball put in a cross and Geoff Hurst swivelled and shot from close range. The ball hit the underside of the cross bar, bounced down – on the line – and was cleared. The referee Gottfried Dienst was uncertain if it had been a goal and consulted his linesman, Tofiq Bahramov from Azerbaijan in the USSR, who in a moment of drama indicated that it was. After non-verbal communication, as they had no common language, the Swiss referee awarded the goal to the home team. The crowd and the audience of 400 million television viewers were left arguing whether the goal should have been given or not.
England's third goal has remained controversial ever since the match. According to the Laws of the Game the definition of a goal is when "the whole of the ball passes over the goal line".
In England, supporters cite the good position of the linesman and the statement of Roger Hunt, the nearest England player to the ball, who claimed it was a goal and that was why he wheeled away in celebration rather than attempting to tap the rebounding ball in.
Modern studies using film analysis and computer simulation have conclusively proved the ball never crossed the line – both Duncan Gillies of the Visual Information Processing Group at Imperial College London and Ian Reid and Andrew Zisserman of the Department of Engineering Science at University of Oxford agree that the ball would have needed to travel a further 2.5–6.0 cm to fully cross the line, and that therefore this was not strictly speaking a goal. Furthermore, there exists colour footage of Hurst's goal, taken from another angle by an amateur cameraman in the stands and having a view almost parallel to the English goal line. This film material claims that the ball did not cross the goal line in full.
Some Germans cited possible bias of the Soviet linesman (Bakhramov was from Azerbaijan), especially as the USSR had just been defeated in the semi-finals by West Germany. Bakhramov later stated in his memoirs that he believed the ball had bounced back not from the crossbar, but from the net and that he was not able to observe the rest of the scene, so it did not matter where the ball hit the ground anyway. (An apocryphal story exists that Bakhramov, when asked why he gave the goal later, simply replied "Stalingrad". There is no evidence that this is genuine.) Swiss referee Gottfried Dienst did not see the scene.
One minute before the end of play, the West Germans sent their defenders forward in a desperate attempt to score a last-minute equaliser. Winning the ball, Bobby Moore picked out the unmarked Geoff Hurst with a long pass, which Hurst carried forward while some spectators began streaming onto the field and Hurst scored moments later. Hurst later admitted that his blistering shot was as much intended to send the ball as far into the Wembley stands as possible should it miss, in order to kill time on the clock.
The final goal gave rise to one of the most famous sayings in English football, when the BBC commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme described the situation as follows:
The matchball from the final is now on display in the National Football Museum in Manchester.
Details.
 England 
 v  West Germany
Champions photograph and statue.
One of the enduring images of the celebrations in Wembley immediately after the game was the picture of the captain Bobby Moore holding the Jules Rimet Trophy aloft, on the shoulders of Geoff Hurst and Ray Wilson, together with Martin Peters. In recognition of Moore and other West Ham United players' contribution to the win, the club and Newham Borough Council jointly commissioned a statue of this scene. On 28 April 2003 Prince Andrew as president of The Football Association, duly unveiled the "World Cup Sculpture" (also called "The Champions") in a prominent place near West Ham's Boleyn Ground (Upton Park), at the junction of Barking Road and Green Street. The one and a half life-size bronze piece was sculpted by Philip Jackson.
Cultural impact.
The final is the most watched event ever on British television, as of January 2012, attracting 32.30 million viewers. In Germany, a goal resulting from a shot bouncing off the crossbar and hitting the line is called a "Wembley-Tor" (Wembley Goal) due to the controversial nature of Hurst's second goal. This goal has been parodied a large number of times. Some of the most notable include:
In August 1966 a special 4d stamp marked was issued by the British Post Office to celebrate the victory and which soared in value to up to 15 shillings each on the back of public enthusiasm for the victory before falling back in value when the public realised it was not rare.
England's win in the final also helped fans to create the Two World Wars and One World Cup chant.
2009 receipt of winners medals.
The players and staff of England's winning squad who did not get medals in 1966 received them on 10 June 2009 after a ceremony at 10 Downing Street in London. Initially, only the 11 players on the pitch at the end of the match received medals, but FIFA later awarded medals to every non-playing squad and staff member from every World Cup-winning country from 1930 to 1974.

</doc>
<doc id="34658" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34658" title="1995">
1995

1995 ()
will be .
This was the year that the Internet entered public consciousness and also the year it was completely privatized and the United States Government no longer funded it with public money - in April 1995 the NSFNET was retired. America Online and Prodigy offered access to the World Wide Web system for the first time this year, releasing browsers that made it easily accessible to the general public.

</doc>
<doc id="34659" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34659" title="1961">
1961

1961 ()
will be . As "MAD Magazine" pointed out on its cover for the March 1961 issue, this was the first "upside-up" year — i.e., one in which the numerals that form the year look the same as when the numerals are rotated upside down, a strobogrammatic number — since 1881. The next such year will be 6009.

</doc>
<doc id="34660" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34660" title="1564">
1564

Year 1564 (MDLXIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34661" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34661" title="1976">
1976

1976 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34662" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34662" title="1959">
1959

1959 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34664" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34664" title="1960">
1960

1960 ()
will be . It is also known as the "Year of Africa" because of major events—particularly the independence of seventeen African nations—that focused global attention on the continent and intensified feelings of Pan-Africanism.

</doc>
<doc id="34665" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34665" title="1919">
1919

1919 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34666" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34666" title="1848">
1848

Year 1848 (MDCCCXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar. It is historically famous for the wave of revolutions, a series of widespread struggles for more liberal governments, which broke out from Brazil to Hungary; although most failed in their immediate aims, they significantly altered the political and philosophical landscape and had major ramifications throughout the rest of the century.

</doc>
<doc id="34667" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34667" title="1866">
1866

Year 1866 (MDCCCLXVI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34668" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34668" title="1896">
1896

Year 1896 (MDCCCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34669" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34669" title="1992">
1992

1992 ()
will be . 
The year was designated as the "International Space Year" by the United Nations.

</doc>
<doc id="34670" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34670" title="1988">
1988

1988 ()
will be .
In the 20th century, the year 1988 has the most Roman numeral digits (11). 1988 was an important year in the early history of the Internet—it was the year of the first well-known computer virus, the 1988 Internet worm. The first officially sanctioned online commercial e-mail provider debuted as well.
The Soviet Union began its major restructuring towards a mixed economy at the beginning of 1988—less than 4 years later the country ceased to exist. The first extrasolar planet, Gamma Cephei Ab (confirmed in 2002) was detected this year as well and the World Health Organization began its mission to eradicate polio, a feat that is nearly complete as of 2015[ [update]].
Births.
December.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34671" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34671" title="1972">
1972

1972 ()
will be .
Within the context of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) it was the longest year ever, as two leap seconds were added during this 366-day year, an event which has not since been repeated. (If its start and end are defined using mean solar time [the legal time scale], its duration was 31622401.141 seconds of Terrestrial Time (or Ephemeris Time), which is slightly shorter than 1908).
Births.
January.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34672" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34672" title="1956">
1956

1956 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34673" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34673" title="1936">
1936

1936 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34674" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34674" title="1928">
1928

1928 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34675" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34675" title="1924">
1924

1924 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34676" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34676" title="1920">
1920

1920 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34677" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34677" title="1916">
1916

1916 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, the events of World War I have the "WWI" prefix.

</doc>
<doc id="34678" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34678" title="500 (card game)">
500 (card game)

500 or "Five Hundred" is a trick-taking game that is an extension of Euchre with some ideas from Bridge. For two to six players it is most commonly played by four players in partnerships but is sometimes recommended as a good three player game. It arose in America before 1900 and was promoted by the United States Playing Card Company, who copyrighted and marketed the rules in 1904. 500 is a social card game and was highly popular in the United States until around 1920 when first Auction bridge and then Contract Bridge drove it from favour. It continued to enjoy popularity in Australia, New Zealand and Quebec.
Setup.
Of the many variants to 500, the standard deck contains 43 playing cards: a Joker is included (sometimes two, in which case the black-and-white joker beats the coloured one), and the 2s, 3s, and two 4s are removed. Either the two black 4s are removed, or the 4 of spades and 4 of diamonds are removed, in which case the 4 that matches the trump color is also considered trump, so that there are always 13 trump cards (14 when using two jokers). Cards are dealt to each of the four players and three (four with two jokers) are dealt face down on the table to form the "kitty" (also known as the "widow" the "blind" or the " hole card".) Alternatively, a 45 card deck can be used (46 with two jokers), in which case the 4s are not removed. Each player still receives a hand of 10 cards, but the kitty is increased to five cards (six with two jokers).
Players play in pairs, usually opposite each other. Traditionally, a bundle of three cards is dealt to each player, one to the kitty, a bundle of four to each player, one to the kitty, a bundle of three to each player, one to the kitty or with a 45 card deck: the deal is performed by dealing three cards to each player, then placing three cards in the kitty, four cards each and two to the kitty, and then three.
As in Euchre, in non-trump suits, the order of cards from highest to lowest is Ace, King, Queen, (Jack), 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, (4). In the trump suit, the highest card is the Joker, sometimes known as "best bower" in reference to the trump Jacks, followed by the Jack of the trump suit called "right bower", and then the Jack of the suit of the same color as the trump suit called "left bower", which is considered part of the trump suit, followed by the Ace, King, Queen, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, (4).
Bower is an Anglicization of the German "Bauer", a word meaning farmer, peasant, or pawn. This name is often used to refer to the Jack of German games.
Bidding.
After people do deal, players call in turn, electing either to bid or to pass. A bid indicates the combined number of tricks the bidder believes he and his partner will take and the suit that will be trumps for that hand, or that there will be no trump suit. For instance, a bid of "seven spades" indicates that the player intends to win seven or more tricks with spades being the trump suit, whereas a bid of "seven no-trumps" indicates that the player intends to win seven or more tricks with no trump suit (in which case the only trump card is the joker).
In American play, a bid of six is called "cheating". A player who bids "inkle spades" is indicating to their partner that they have some spades but not enough to bid seven. Only the first two players may inkle.
A player may elect not to bid, or to "pass". Bidding proceeds clockwise around the table, with each player passing or making a higher-scoring bid. A player who passes cannot subsequently make a bid in that hand.
A player who has bid may only bid again in that hand if there has been an intervening bid by another player. However, in some variations a player who has bid and not passed may always bid again in that hand.
The order of seniority of suits in bidding (highest to lowest, as reflected in the scores below) is hearts, diamonds, clubs, spades. Therefore, for example, a player who bids "seven clubs" may be outbid by a subsequent bidding player on seven diamonds or seven hearts, but not seven spades. A "no trumps" bid beats any suited bid of the same number. Inkles are typically also similarly ranked: If the first player bids "six hearts", the next player cannot inkle spades, clubs, or diamonds. Their only options are to inkle no trump, bid seven or more (of any suit, or no trump or Misère), or pass. Eventually, all but one player passes and the bid is decided.
In American play, there is only one round of bidding, with each player getting one chance, in turn, to either bid or pass. The player making the successful bid then collects the kitty. This player sorts through his hand and discards the least-useful three (or five in the case of a 45 card deck) cards (possibly including cards picked up from the kitty), and places them face down; the discarded cards playing no further part in the hand.
If nobody makes a bid, there are multiple variations. Most commonly, the hand is declared dead and a reshuffle and re-deal is made. This can be repeated only twice, after which the deal passes to the next player. Alternatively, the game is played where no bids mean the round is played as no trumps, and scoring is ten points per trick. Other variations include that the deal passes to the next player (no reshuffle); or that if no one else makes a bid, the dealer is required to make a bid.
Gameplay.
The game focuses on tricks. The lead starts with the player who won the bidding. In some variations, the player to the dealer's left leads first regardless of who won the bid. Players must follow suit if they can (This includes the left bower or any other card that is considered a trump, if trumps are led). If a player no longer has any cards of the suit that is led, he may play any card in his hand. After all four players have played a card, the highest trump takes the trick. If no trumps are played, the highest card of the lead suit wins the trick. The winner of the trick leads on the next trick. Once all ten tricks have been played, the hand is scored. The player to the left of the previous dealer deals for the next hand, so that the deal moves clockwise around the table.
Double nullo may be called by one partner even if the other partner passes. In this instance the player who calls nullo draws in his/her partner and both must play and not take any tricks. The person who calls double nullo picks up the kitty and gives the five cards he/she wants to discard to their partner. Their partner then must take those five cards and pick the ones he/she wants to keep and discard the rest.
Variations.
Variations exist, with appropriate additions or deductions to the deck for playing three, five or six-handed 500. Three-handed uses no teams, five-handed teams rotate and each player takes a turn without a partner, six-handed can be played as either three teams of two or two teams of three. Six-handed 500 requires a special deck with 63 cards.
Set Rule.
The game may be played with a standard variation known as "setting". An opponent is "set" when they fail to fulfill a contract by a predetermined number of bids. The point system and scoring remain as per standard, but an opponent who is awarded the kitty and is subsequently set is not allowed to bid in the next round. Note that it is only the player awarded the kitty (not all players on the team) that is not allowed to bid in the next round. In the case of a set occurring during double misère the player who touches the kitty first is not allowed to bid in the next round.
Typically, the set occurs at one trick more than is actually necessary to break the bidding team’s contract. In other words, 5 tricks in a 7 trick bid, 4 tricks in an 8 trick bid, 3 tricks in a 9 trick bid, 2 tricks in a 10 trick bid. However, for misère, open misère, and double misère a set always occurs at 3 tricks.
Breach rule (related to the Set rule).
Breach indicates that a non-bidding team intends to breach the contract of a bidding team by at least one more trick than is actually necessary to break the contract. As opposed to the Setting rule, Breach must be called on a per hand basis, and does result in additional scoring. Typically, Breach is not played in a game when the setting rule is being used.
A single player from a non-bidding partnership may call to breach another team’s contract after a successful bid for a seven-trick (or more) contract has been made. The breach call may be made before or after the contracting team picks up the kitty, but must be made before game play starts. Typically, a breach occurs at one trick more than is actually necessary to break the bidding team’s contract. In other words, 5 tricks in a 7 trick bid, 4 tricks in an 8 trick bid, 3 tricks in a 9 trick bid, 2 tricks in a 10 trick bid. However, for misère, open misère, and double misère a breach always occurs at 3 tricks.
A breach call can result in three different scenarios:
-Win/Lose: If the bidding team successfully fulfills its contract, then it receives the full points of the original bid, and the team calling breach loses points.
-Lose/Lose: If the bidding team does not fulfill its bid, but the opposing team does not take the necessary number of tricks to perform a breach, then the bidding team loses the point value of the original bid, and the team calling breach loses the predetermined value of the breach call.
-Lose/Win: If the bidding team loses its bid by the pre-established number of tricks, then the bidding team loses the contract points, and the team calling breach gains the predetermined value of the breach call.
Because breach is not considered an actual bid, a team may not win or lose (“go out the back door”) based on points gained or lost from a breach call.
A player who calls breach but does not fulfill the conditions of breach (win/lose or lose/lose scenario) is not allowed to bid in the next round. A player who bids a seven-trick contract but is successfully breached by an opponent (lose/win scenario) is not allowed to bid in the next round.
Point Spread rule.
A variation on the score keeping, the point-spread rule ends the game when one team has a negative score and the other team has a positive score, which results in a point spread of 500 or more points.
Versions.
Two-handed 500.
Two-handed 500 is played with a deck of 45 cards as per the standard game. Whereas in the standard game which includes partners, in the Two-handed game each player plays both the hand that is dealt to them and their partner’s which is dealt to the table. The deal is the same as the standard game, except that the partners hands are dealt to the table so that they have 5 cards face down, each covered by a face up card (to give a total of 10 cards). Bidding is the same as the standard game except "Misère" is generally not allowed. The kitty is used with the player’s hand only and no cards can be swapped between the hands. Order of play is as per the standard game. After each trick any exposed face down cards from the partner’s hands are turned up and revealed. Play then continues with the lead from the hand that won the last trick.
Alternatively, the game can be played as per three-handed but with a "dead hand".
An alternate version is played with the standard 52 card deck. Each player is dealt ten cards and then 8 more cards are exposed on the table. Each player chooses one of these cards to be added to the kitty. No dummies are used and the bidding is standard. After the bid is won the defending player adds one of the remaining exposed cards to his hand and discards an unwanted card. The remaining exposed cards are added to the dead card pile.
Three-handed 500.
Three-handed 500 is played with a deck of 33 cards. Dealing, scoring and game play are as for the standard game. The common variant is in bidding, where "misère" may be bid before a bid for seven tricks. This variant is permitted due to the relative rarity of seven-trick bids outside of team play. "Open misère" may be bid in a similar fashion. Alternatively, the game may be played with the standard deck (45 or 43 cards) with one hand dealt face down, which remains untouched during the game (a so-called "dead hand"). The common strategy is that the two players who are unsuccessful in bidding form a temporary alliance in an attempt to force the other player to lose his bid.
Five-handed 500.
Another variation allows five players to play. All of the cards in a deck are used (although only one joker) so that each player can be dealt ten cards. The bidding starts to the dealer's left, and works by the same system as normal 500. The player who wins the bidding then gets to choose a card (the joker cannot be chosen). One of the bowers is usually chosen, or another high card. There are two versions of this variation. In one, the player who owns the chosen card announces that they have it, and then becomes the bidder's partner for that round. In the other, the player winning the bidding will not know who their partner is until the chosen card is played. Note that the partnership will usually change for each round. The remaining three players then play against the partnership. The player who won the bid gets to play the first card.
Scoring for this variation uses the same values as normal 500. If the partnership wins the required amount of tricks, they will both get points (full points each or half points each, depending on the variation), and if they don't, they will both lose points (either full or half). If one of the three remaining players wins a trick, that player will receive ten points.
Neither misère nor open misère is usually permitted in this variant since it is too easy to win.
Because the partnership changes each round, there are no fixed teams and each player plays for themselves. This adds dynamic, and new strategies will arise.
Six-handed 500.
Special decks of cards were created by the United States Playing Card Company for playing six-handed 500, using a total of 63 cards. Besides using all 52 cards of the standard poker deck, plus one joker, these sets include 11's, 12's, and red 13's. Each player receives 10 cards, and the kitty receives 3. Players seated in alternating positions around the table form two teams of three players each. These decks are also made by Queen's Slipper, Piatnik, and Cartamundi.
No Trump 500.
In some versions, no trump games (including misère), the only trump card is the joker (i.e. the best card) and it has no suit. There are no bowers and all the jacks fall between the queen and ten of their respective suits. Players must always follow suit and may use the joker to trump a trick only if they cannot otherwise follow suit. A player may not "renege" with the joker - i.e., use it as a card of a suit in which the player has already claimed to be void. In some variations, the joker may only be played as the first or last card in a suit.
In other variations, the person who wins the bid also has the option to 'Declare'. Such a declaration entitles the winner of the bid to receive one card from his partner after discarding from the kitty or blind. The partner picks his best card and hands it face down to the winning bidder, who must then discard one additional card to retain a ten-card hand. The winning bidder now plays against the opponents without the assistance of the partner and must take all ten tricks. If such a bid is unsuccessful it is scored as -500 (negative 500).
Walker Ultimate 500.
A variation in which the winning team/player must win exactly 500 points. The game is played as normal, with the additional rule that 1000 points (like negative 500 points) loses the game. "Peggings" (or "Scab Points") must be played. This variation usually (not always) results in a longer game, but generates an enjoyable level of complexity to both the bidding and playing.
Local variants may not include either "open misère", "misère" or both.
French Canadian Variation.
A variation for four players using two Jokers ("bonhommes") and a standard 52-card pack stripped of 2s and 3s. The white Joker ("la blanche") is considered stronger. The players are dealt 10 cards each in batches of 3-3-4. When 3 are passed, another 3 go to the kitty ("chatte", middle of the table). There should be 6 cards in the middle after the deal. Some variations allow for the final card placed in the kitty to be turned upright for all players to see.
The attacking player takes the kitty and discards 6 cards of his choice, and no other player may see them. The bidding goes accordingly with the other variation, and Misère ("Nulot") may be allowed. The "petite" misère is equal to 500 points and can only be outbid by 8 no trump while "la grosse" or open misère is worth 1000 points and can only be outbid by 10 no trump (the latter is distinguished in that all cards are placed face-up on the table).
The game is played to a total of 1000 points. If a team fails to fulfil its contract, the points are added to the other team's total. Points are never subtracted.
Score keeping.
The goal is for the team who wins the bid to take at least as many tricks as they bid. If the high bid is "eight hearts," then the team wins the hand if they take 8, 9, or all 10 tricks and are awarded points according to the table below. There are no bonuses for overtricks (tricks over the number bid). If they do not make their bid, the same number of points is subtracted from their score. Whether or not the bid winning team achieves its bid, the opposing team receives 10 points for each trick they take. A team wins the game by scoring at least 500 points. A team whose score dips to -500 points or below loses the game. This is also known as going "out the back door" or "out backwards."
Original Scoring
Variations in score keeping
Strategy.
Bidding.
Bids are typically made with the consideration that you will be receiving cards from the kitty and playing with a partner (except for misère and open misère) who hopefully will also be able to win a certain amount of tricks. While the number of tricks you feel your partner will be able to win will vary in each situation, you should bid based on that assumption and not only on the cards in your hand.
On the other hand, it is also important to remember that your partner will be using the same strategy in their bidding; and therefore, if your partner bids six hearts, for example, you may not necessarily want to bid eight hearts simply because you have two cards of the proposed trump suit in your hand.
When confronted with a hand that is more-or-less even in two different suits, it is customary to bid on the suit with a higher point value.
Card Counting.
When playing with 45 cards, the deck is composed of four suits with 11 cards each, and one Joker. In a suited contract (e.g., seven hearts, eight spades, etc.), the trump suit will have 13 cards, the suit of the same color will have only ten, and the two suits of opposite color will remain at 11 cards each.
A simple strategy to bidding is to attempt to predict how the unaccounted-for trump cards (the ones you don’t actually hold in your hand) would be distributed among the remaining players, excluding the kitty, with all things being equal. In other words, if you hold seven cards of one suit it can be helpful to assume that the remaining six trump cards are distributed evenly among the remaining three players (two each and none in the kitty). Doing so can provide a basic idea of how many times your opponents will be able to follow suit in each of the four suits.
Discarding the kitty.
If you are successful at bidding a suited contract and are awarded the kitty, a basic strategy of discarding is to eliminate as many non-trump suits from your hand as possible, thus giving the most opportunity to use trump cards. However, discarding as many suits as possible is only a basic strategy, and should be met with some qualifications.
First, in most contract bids it is beneficial to keep an ace of any non-trump suit, as with all things being equal each player should have at least two cards of any given suit, thus the ace of any non-trump suit should theoretically be a winning card.
Second, it can also be effective in some circumstances to intentionally keep the king of a non-trump suit and a low card of the same suit (for example the six and king of hearts when spades are trump) when you are unable to discard that suit entirely. The resulting strategy is to then play the low card first, with the assumption that you will lose the trick to the player holding the ace of that suit, and then when you have regained control of the table the king is played under the assumption that it will be a winning card.
Playing the cards.
The way in which cards should be led will always be situational, and is subject to variations in the rules described in the Rules section.
Leading trump.
Sometimes called "flushing" or "bleeding" trump, leading the trump suit immediately can often be (but isn’t always) an effective strategy. This is typically done in the following situations.
First, when a player has an above-average number of high trump cards they may wish to flush out the missing high trump cards. For example, if a player who has bid seven hearts is left holding the Joker, jack of diamonds, ace of hearts, king of hearts, queen of hearts and four of hearts, then they have five of the six highest cards (and six total). A suitable strategy would be to start the game playing highest trump (the Joker) in an attempt to force the play of the jack of hearts.
An alternate, but similar, strategy in this situation would be to play the queen of hearts. This alternate strategy would force the player holding the jack of hearts to decide between either playing the jack, or throwing away a lower trump card to intentionally lose to the queen.

</doc>
<doc id="34679" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34679" title="1895">
1895

Year 1895 (MDCCCXCV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34680" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34680" title="1861">
1861

Year 1861 (MDCCCLXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34681" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34681" title="Thirteen Colonies">
Thirteen Colonies

The Thirteen Colonies, as of 1775, were British colonies on the east coast of North America which had been founded between 1607 (Virginia) and 1732 (Georgia), stretching from New England to the northern border of the Floridas (British East and West Florida). They had highly similar political, constitutional and legal systems, and were dominated by Protestant English-speakers. Most of their external connections were with Britain until the 1750s, when they began collaborating with each other at the Albany Congress of 1754 to demand more rights. Responding to popular grievances against London, they set up a Continental Congress in 1774, which declared independence from Great Britain in 1776, set up state governments, and formed a new nation, the United States of America. The thirteen were: Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Georgia, Connecticut, Massachusetts Bay, Maryland, South Carolina, New Hampshire, Virginia, New York, North Carolina, and Rhode Island and Providence Plantations.
The States of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and New Jersey were formed by mergers of previous colonies.
All the colonies had a high degree of self-government and most white men could and did vote for local and legislative officials. The colonies were all prosperous and had high growth rates based on immigration from Britain and Germany, together with ample food supplies and land for new settlers. Most families operated subsistence farms. All the colonies had legal slavery, with slave-based plantations in the South producing valuable exports such as tobacco and rice. The Northern and Middle colonies concentrated on trade. The frontier districts often confronted Indian wars, but by 1700 the colonists greatly outnumbered the Indians.
The British government in London practiced a policy of mercantilism. It administered the colonies for the benefit of the mother country, while the colonists after 1760 resisted British demands for more control, especially over taxes. The colonies were religiously diverse, though overwhelmingly Protestant with the Anglican Church of England officially established in most of the South, but there were no bishops and the churches had only local roles. Education was widespread in the northern colonies, which had established colleges such as Harvard and Yale, while the College of William and Mary trained the elite in Virginia.
The Thirteen Colonies.
Each of the thirteen colonies developed its own system of self-government, based largely on independent farmers who owned their own land, voted for their local and provincial government, and served on local juries. In some of the colonies, especially Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia, there were also substantial populations of African slaves. Following a series of protests over taxes in the 1760s and 1770s, these colonies united politically and militarily in opposition to the British government and fought the American Revolutionary War, 1775–1783. In July 1776, they formed a new nation called the "United States of America," declared independence. The new nation achieved that goal by winning the American Revolutionary War with the aid of France, the Netherlands and Spain. 
Other colonies.
Besides these thirteen, Britain had another dozen colonies in the New World.. Those in the British West Indies, Newfoundland, the Province of Quebec, Nova Scotia, Bermuda, and East and West Florida remained loyal to the crown throughout the war (although Spain conquered Florida before the war was over). Although there was a degree of sympathy with the Patriot cause in several of them, their geographical isolation and the dominance of British naval power precluded any effective participation. Especially in the case of Quebec and Florida, the British crown had only recently acquired those lands, and many of the issues facing the Thirteen Colonies did not apply to them.
Growth.
Contemporary documents usually list the thirteen colonies of British North America in geographical order, from the north to the south.
Population.
Note: the population figures are estimates by historians; they do not include the native tribes outside the jurisdiction of the colonies. They do include natives living under colonial control, as well as slaves and indentured servants.
By 1776 about 85% of the white population was of English, Irish, Scottish or Welsh descent, with 9% of German origin and 4% Dutch. These populations continued to grow at a rapid rate throughout the 18th century primarily because of high birth rates, and relatively low death rates. Immigration was a minor factor from 1774 to 1830. Over 90% were farmers, with several small cities that were also seaports linking the colonial economy to the larger British Empire.
Slaves.
Slavery was legal and practiced in each of the Thirteen Colonies. In most places it involved house servants or farm workers. It was of economic importance in the export-oriented tobacco plantations of Virginia and Maryland, and the rice and indigo plantations of South Carolina. About 287,000 slaves were imported into the Thirteen Colonies, or 2% of the 12 million slaves brought across from Africa. The great majority went to sugar colonies in the Caribbean and to Brazil, where life expectancy was short and the numbers had to be continually replenished. Life expectancy was much higher in the U.S. Combined with a very high birth rate, the numbers grew rapidly by excesses of births over deaths, reaching nearly 4 million by the 1860 census. From 1770 until 1860, the rate of natural growth of North American slaves was much greater than for the population of any nation in Europe, and was nearly twice as rapid as that of England. However, Tadman attributes this to very high birth rates: "U.S. slaves, then, reached similar rates of natural increase to whites not because of any special privileges but through a process of great suffering and material deprivation".
Government.
British role.
The Royal government in London after 1680 took an increasing interest in the affairs of the colonies-- which were growing rapidly in population and wealth so as to rival the homeland. In 1680, only Virginia was a royal colony; by 1720 half were under the control of Royal governors. These governors were appointees closely tied to the government in London. Historians before the 1880s emphasized American nationalism. However Intellectual leadership after that was held by the "Imperial school" led by Herbert L. Osgood, George Louis Beer, Charles McLean Andrews, and Lawrence H. Gipson. They dominated colonial historiography into the 1940s. They emphasized, and often praised, the attention London gave to all the colonies. There was never a threat (before the 1770s) that any colony would revolt or seek independence.
Self-government.
British settlers did not come to the American colonies with the intention of creating a democratic system, yet by doing so without a land-owning aristocracy they created a broad electorate and a pattern of free and frequent elections that put a premium on voter participation. The colonies offered a much broader franchise than England or indeed any other country. White men with enough property could vote for members of the lower house of the legislature, and in Connecticut and Rhode Island they could even vote for the governor. Legitimacy for a voter meant having an "interest" in society – as the South Carolina legislature said in 1716, "it is necessary and reasonable, that none but such persons will have an interest in the Province should be capable to elect members of the Commons House of Assembly." Women, children, indentured servants and slaves were subsumed under the interest of the family head. The main legal criterion for having an "interest" was ownership of property, which was narrowly based in Britain, and nineteen out of twenty men were controlled politically by their landlords. London insisted on it for the colonies, telling governors to exclude men who were not freeholders (that is, did not own land) from the ballot. Nevertheless land was so widely owned that 50% to 80% of the white men were eligible to vote.
The colonial political culture emphasized deference, so that local notables were the men who ran and were chosen. But sometimes they competed with each other, and had to appeal to the common man for votes. There were no political parties, and would-be legislators formed ad-hoc coalitions of their families, friends, and neighbors. Outside Puritan New England, election day brought in all the men from the countryside to the county seat to make merry, politick, shake hands with the grandees, and meet old friends, hear the speeches and all the while toasting, eating, treating, tippling, gaming and gambling. They voted by shouting their choice to the clerk, as supporters cheered or booed. Candidate George Washington spent £39 for treats for his supporters. The candidates knew they had to "swill the planters with bumbo (rum)." Elections were carnivals where all men were equal for one day and traditional restraints relaxed.
The actual rate of voting ranged from 20% to 40% of all adult white males. The rates were higher in Pennsylvania and New York, where long-standing factions, based on ethnic and religious groups, mobilized supporters at a higher rate. New York and Rhode Island developed long-lasting two-faction systems that held together for years at the colony level, but did not reach into local affairs. The factions were based on the personalities of a few leaders and an array of family connections, however, had little basis in policy or ideology. Elsewhere the political scene was in a constant whirl, and based on personality rather than long-lived factions or serious disputes on issues.
The colonies were independent of each other before 1774 as efforts led by Benjamin Franklin to form a colonial union through the Albany Congress of 1754 had failed. The thirteen all had well established systems of self-government and elections based on the Rights of Englishmen, which they were determined to protect from imperial interference. The vast majority of white men were eligible to vote.
Economic policy.
The British Empire at the time operated under the mercantile system, where all trade was concentrated inside the Empire, and trade with other empires was forbidden. The goal was to enrich Britain—its merchants and its government. Whether the policy was good for the colonists was not an issue in London, but Americans became increasingly restive with mercantilist policies.
Mercantilism meant that the government and the merchants became partners with the goal of increasing political power and private wealth, to the exclusion of other empires. The government protected its merchants—and kept others out—by trade barriers, regulations, and subsidies to domestic industries in order to maximize exports from and minimize imports to the realm. The government had to fight smuggling—which became a favorite American technique in the 18th century to circumvent the restrictions on trading with the French, Spanish or Dutch. The tactic used by mercantilism was to run trade surpluses, so that gold and silver would pour into London. The government took its share through duties and taxes, with the remainder going to merchants in Britain. The government spent much of its revenue on a superb Royal Navy, which not only protected the British colonies but threatened the colonies of the other empires, and sometimes seized them. Thus the British Navy captured New Amsterdam (New York) in 1664. The colonies were captive markets for British industry, and the goal was to enrich the mother country.
Legislation prior to 1763.
Britain implemented mercantilism by trying to block American trade with the French, Spanish or Dutch empires using the Navigation Acts, which Americans avoided as often as they could. The royal officials responded to smuggling with open-ended search warrants (Writs of Assistance). In 1761, Boston lawyer James Otis argued that the writs violated the constitutional rights of the colonists. He lost the case, but John Adams later wrote, "Then and there the child Independence was born."
However, the colonists took pains to argue that they did not oppose British regulation of their external trade, they only opposed legislation which was thought to impact them internally.
On December 1, 1763, at Hanover Courthouse, Patrick Henry argued the Parson's Cause in the Colony of Virginia, where the legislature had passed a law and it was vetoed by the king. Henry argued, "that a King, by disallowing Acts of this salutary nature, from being the father of his people, degenerated into a Tyrant and forfeits all right to his subjects' obedience".
Following their victory in the French and Indian War in 1763, Great Britain took control of the French holdings in North America, outside the Caribbean. The British sought to maintain peaceful relations with those Indian tribes that had allied with the French, and keep them separated from the American frontiersmen. To this end, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 restricted settlement west of the Appalachian Mountains as this was designated an Indian Reserve. Disregarding the proclamation, some groups of settlers continued to move west and establish farms. The proclamation was soon modified and was no longer a hindrance to settlement, but the fact that it had been promulgated without their prior consultation angered the colonists.
Coming of American revolution.
Beginning with the intense protests over the Stamp Act of 1765, the Americans insisted on the principle of "no taxation without representation", representation being understood in the context of Parliament directly levying the duty or excise tax, and thus by-passing the colonial legislatures, which had levied taxes on the colonies in the monarch's stead prior to 1763. They argued that, as the colonies had no representation in the British Parliament, it was a violation of their rights as Englishmen for taxes to be imposed upon them. Those other British colonies that had assemblies largely agreed with those in the Thirteen Colonies, but they were thoroughly controlled by the British Empire and the Royal Navy, so protests were hopeless.
Parliament rejected the colonial protests and asserted its authority by passing new taxes. Trouble escalated over the tea tax, as Americans in each colony boycotted the tea and in Boston dumped the tea in the harbor during the Boston Tea Party in 1773. Tensions escalated in 1774 as Parliament passed the laws known as the Intolerable Acts, which, among other things, greatly restricted self-government in the colony of Massachusetts.
In response, the colonies formed extralegal bodies of elected representatives, generally known as Provincial Congresses. Colonists emphasized their determination by boycotting imports of British merchandise. Later in 1774 twelve colonies sent representatives to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia. During the Second Continental Congress the thirteenth colony, Georgia, sent delegates. By spring 1775 all royal officials had been expelled from all thirteen colonies. The Continental Congress was the national government. It raised an army to fight the British and named George Washington its commander, made treaties, declared independence, and recommended that the colonies write constitutions and become states.
Other British colonies.
At the time of the war Britain had seven other colonies on the Atlantic coast of North America: Newfoundland, Rupert's Land (the area around the Hudson Bay), Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, East Florida, West Florida, and the Province of Quebec. There were other colonies in the Americas as well, largely in the British West Indies. These colonies remained loyal to the crown.
Newfoundland stayed loyal to Britain without question. It was exempt from the Navigation Acts and shared none of the grievances of the continental colonies. It was tightly bound to Britain and controlled by the Royal Navy and had no assembly that could voice grievances.
Nova Scotia had a large Yankee element that had recently arrived from New England, and shared the sentiments of the Americans about demanding the rights of the British men. The royal government in Halifax reluctantly allowed the Yankees of Nova Scotia a kind of "neutrality." In any case, the island-like geography and the presence of the major British naval base at Halifax made the thought of armed resistance impossible.
Quebec was inhabited by French Catholic settlers who came under British control in the previous decade. The Quebec Act of 1774 gave them formal cultural autonomy within the empire, and many priests feared the intense Protestantism in New England. The American grievances over taxation had little relevance, and there was no assembly nor elections of any kind that could have mobilized any grievances. Even so the Americans offered membership in the new nation and sent a military expedition that failed to capture Canada in 1775. Most Canadians remained neutral but some joined the American cause.
In the West Indies the elected assemblies of Jamaica, Grenada, and Barbados formally declared their sympathies for the American cause and called for mediation, but the others were quite loyal. Britain carefully avoided antagonizing the rich owners of sugar plantations (many of whom lived in London); in turn the planters' greater dependence on slavery made them recognize the need for British military protection from possible slave revolts. The possibilities for overt action were sharply limited by the overwhelming power of Royal Navy in the islands. During the war there was some opportunistic trading with American ships.
In Bermuda and the Bahamas local leaders were angry at the food shortages caused by British blockade of American ports. There was increasing sympathy for the American cause, including smuggling, and both colonies were considered "passive allies" of the United States throughout the war. When an American naval squadron arrived in the Bahamas to seize gunpowder, the colony gave no resistance at all.
East Florida and West Florida were territories transferred from Spain to Britain after the French and Indian War by treaty. The few British colonists there needed protection from attacks by Indians and Spanish privateers. After 1775, East Florida became a major base for the British war effort in the South, especially in the invasions of Georgia and South Carolina. However, Spain seized Pensacola in West Florida in 1781, then recovered both territories in the Treaty of Paris that ended the war in 1783. Spain ultimately transferred the Florida provinces to the United States in 1819.

</doc>
<doc id="34684" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34684" title="1937">
1937

1937 ()
will be .
Births.
March–April.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34685" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34685" title="1648">
1648

Year 1648 (MDCXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar. It is the year of the Peace of Westphalia.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34686" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34686" title="1572">
1572

Year 1572 (MDLXXII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34687" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34687" title="1623">
1623

Year 1623 (MDCXXIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34688" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34688" title="1662">
1662

Year 1662 (MDCLXII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34689" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34689" title="1915">
1915

1915 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, the events of World War I have the "WWI" prefix

</doc>
<doc id="34690" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34690" title="1910">
1910

1910 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34691" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34691" title="1966">
1966

1966 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34692" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34692" title="1490s">
1490s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34693" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34693" title="1640s">
1640s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34695" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34695" title="1770s">
1770s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34696" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34696" title="1780s">
1780s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34697" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34697" title="1789">
1789

Year 1789 (MDCCLXXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34698" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34698" title="1782">
1782

Year 1782 (MDCCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34699" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34699" title="1840">
1840

Year 1840 (MDCCCXL) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34700" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34700" title="1840s">
1840s

The 1840s decade ran from January 1, 1840, to December 31, 1849.
Politics and wars.
Pacific Islands.
In 1842, Tahiti and Tahuata were declared a French protectorate, to allow Catholic missionaries to work undisturbed. The capital of Papeetē was founded in 1843. In 1845, George Tupou I united Tonga into a kingdom, and reigned as Tuʻi Kanokupolu.
East Asia.
China.
On August 29, 1842, the first of two Opium Wars ended between China and Britain with the Treaty of Nanking. One of the consequences was the cession of modern day Hong Kong Island to the British. Hong Kong would eventually be returned to China in 1997.
Other events:
Japan.
The 1840s comprised the end of the Tenpō era (1830-1844), the entirety of the Kōka era (1844-1848), and the beginning of the Kaei era (1848-1854). The decade saw the end of the reign of Emperor Ninko in 1846, who was succeeded by his son, Emperor Kōmei.
Southeastern Asia.
Vietnam.
Emperors Minh Mạng, Thiệu Trị and Tự Đức ruled Vietnam during the 1840s under the Nguyễn dynasty.
Southern Asia.
Afghanistan.
The First Anglo-Afghan War had started in 1838, started by the British as a means of defending India (under British control at the time) from the Russian Empire's expansion into Central Asia. The British attempted to impose a puppet regime on Afghanistan under Shuja Shah, but the regime was short lived and proved unsustainable without British military support. By 1842, mobs were attacking the British on the streets of Kabul and the British garrison was forced to abandon the city due to constant civilian attacks. During the retreat from Kabul, the British army of approximately 4,500 troops (of which only 690 were European) and 12,000 camp followers was subjected to a series of attacks by Afghan warriors. All Europeans but one were killed; a few Indian soldiers survived also and crossed into India later. The British curbed their ambitions in Afghanistan following this humiliating retreat.
Afghanistan would remain independent (under the Barakzai dynasty) through the rest of the decade, ruled by Akbar Khan (1842-1845), and Dost Mohammad Khan (1845-1863).
Sikh Empire.
The Sikh Empire was founded in 1799, ruled by Ranjit Singh. When Singh died in 1839, the Sikh Empire began to fall into disorder. There was a succession of short-lived rulers at the central Durbar (court), and increasing tension between the Khalsa (the Sikh Army) and the Durbar. In May 1841, the Dogra dynasty (a vassal of the Sikh Empire) invaded western Tibet, marking the beginning of the Sino-Sikh war. This war ended in a stalemate in September 1842, with the Treaty of Chushul.
The British East India Company began to build up its military strength on the borders of the Punjab. Eventually, the increasing tension goaded the Khalsa to invade British territory, under weak and possibly treacherous leaders. The hard-fought First Anglo-Sikh War (1845-1846) ended in defeat for the Khalsa. With the Treaty of Lahore, the Sikh Empire ceded Kashmir to the East India Company and surrendered the Koh-i-Noor diamond to Queen Victoria.
The Sikh empire was finally dissolved at the end of the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849 into separate princely states and the British province of Punjab. Eventually, a Lieutenant Governorship was formed in Lahore as a direct representative of the British Crown.
Western Asia.
Ottoman Empire.
The decade was near the beginning of the Tanzimât Era of the Ottoman Empire. Sultan Abdülmecid I ruled during this period.
Revolutions of 1848.
There was a wave of revolutions in Europe, collectively known as the Revolutions of 1848. It remains the most widespread revolutionary wave in European history, but within a year, reactionary forces had regained control, and the revolutions collapsed.
The revolutions were essentially bourgeois-democratic in nature with the aim of removing the old feudal structures and the creation of independent national states. The revolutionary wave began in France in February, and immediately spread to most of Europe and parts of Latin America. Over 50 countries were affected, but with no coordination or cooperation among the revolutionaries in different countries. Six factors were involved: widespread dissatisfaction with political leadership; demands for more participation in government and democracy; demands for freedom of press; the demands of the working classes; the upsurge of nationalism; and finally, the regrouping of the reactionary forces based on the royalty, the aristocracy, the army, and the peasants.
The uprisings were led by ad hoc coalitions of reformers, the middle classes and workers, which did not hold together for long. Tens of thousands of people were killed, and many more forced into exile. The only significant lasting reforms were the abolition of serfdom in Austria and Hungary, the end of absolute monarchy in Denmark, and the definitive end of the Capetian monarchy in France. The revolutions were most important in France, the Netherlands, Germany, Poland, Italy, and the Austrian Empire, but did not reach Russia, Sweden, Great Britain, and most of southern Europe (Spain, Serbia, Greece, Montenegro, Portugal, the Ottoman Empire).
Northern Europe.
United Kingdom.
Ireland.
The Great Famine of the 1840s caused the deaths of one million Irish people and over a million more emigrated to escape it. It is sometimes referred to, mostly outside Ireland, as the "Irish Potato Famine" because one-third of the population was then solely reliant on this cheap crop for a number of historical reasons. The proximate cause of famine was a potato disease commonly known as potato blight. A census taken in 1841 revealed a population of slightly over 8 million. A census immediately after the famine in 1851 counted 6,552,385, a drop of almost 1.5 million in 10 years.
The period of the potato blight in Ireland from 1845 to 1851 was full of political confrontation. A more radical Young Ireland group seceded from the Repeal movement and attempted an armed rebellion in the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848, which was unsuccessful.
North America.
United States.
Presidents.
The United States had five different Presidents during the decade. Only the 1880s would have as many. Martin Van Buren was President when the decade began, but was defeated by William Henry Harrison in the U.S. presidential election of 1840. Harrison's service was the shortest in history, starting with his inauguration on March 4, 1841, and ending when he died on April 4, 1841.
Harrison's vice president, John Tyler, replaced him as President (the first Presidential succession in U.S. history), and served out the rest of his term. Tyler spent much of his term in conflict with the Whig party. He ended his term having made an alliance with the Democrats, endorsing James K. Polk and signing the resolution to annex Texas into the United States.
In the Presidential election of 1844, James K. Polk defeated Henry Clay. During his presidency, Polk oversaw the U.S. victory in the Mexican–American War and subsequent annexation of what is now the southwest United States. He also negotiated a split of the Oregon Territory with Great Britain.
In the U.S. presidential election of 1848, Whig Zachary Taylor of Louisiana defeated Democrat Lewis Cass of Michigan. Taylor's term in office was cut short by his death in 1850.
Mexican–American War.
In 1845, the United States of America annexed Texas, which had won independence from Centralist Republic of Mexico in the Texas Revolution of 1836. Nevertheless, Mexico still considered Texas part of its territory, declaring war on the U.S., and starting the Mexican–American War (1846–1848).
Combat operations lasted a year and a half, from the spring of 1846 to the fall of 1847. American forces quickly occupied New Mexico and California, then invaded parts of Northeastern Mexico and Northwest Mexico; meanwhile, the Pacific Squadron conducted a blockade, and took control of several garrisons on the Pacific coast farther south in Baja California. Another American army captured Mexico City, and the war ended in a victory for the United States.
American territorial expansion to the Pacific coast was a major goal of U.S. President James K. Polk. Thus, in the war-ending Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, the U.S. forced Mexican Cession of the territories of Alta California and New Mexico to the United States in exchange for $15 million, In addition, the United States assumed $3.25 million of debt owed by the Mexican government to U.S. citizens. Mexico accepted the loss of Texas and thereafter cited the Rio Grande as its national border.
Science and Technology.
Photography.
The 1840s saw the rise of the Daguerreotype. Introduced in 1839, the Daguerreotype was the first publicly announced photographic process and came into widespread use in the 1840s. Numerous events in the 1840s were captured by photography for the first time with the use of the Daguerreotype. A number of daguerrotypes were taken of the occupation of Saltillo during the Mexican–American War, in 1847 by an unknown photographer. These photographs stand as the first ever photos of warfare in history.
Transportation.
Rail.
Widespread interest to invest in rail technology led to a speculative frenzy in Britain, known there as Railway Mania. It reached its zenith in 1846, when no fewer than 272 Acts of Parliament were passed, setting up new railway companies, and the proposed routes totalled 9500 mi of new railway. Around a third of the railways authorised were never built – the company either collapsed due to poor financial planning, was bought out by a larger competitor before it could build its line, or turned out to be a fraudulent enterprise to channel investors' money into another business.
Popular culture.
Fashion.
Fashion in European and European-influenced clothing is characterized by a narrow, natural shoulder line following the exaggerated puffed sleeves of the later 1820s fashion and 1830s fashion. The narrower shoulder was accompanied by a lower waistline for both men and women.
Disasters, natural events, and notable mishaps.
Cholera.
The cholera epidemic struck throughout Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="34701" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34701" title="1883">
1883

Year 1883 (MDCCCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34702" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34702" title="1800s (decade)">
1800s (decade)

The 1800s decade lasted from January 1, 1800, to December 31, 1809.
Politics and wars.
Napoleonic Wars.
The European political landscape was dominated by the Napoleonic Wars, a series of conflicts declared against Napoleon's First French Empire and changing sets of European allies by opposing coalitions that ran from 1803 to 1815. As a continuation of the wars sparked by the French Revolution of 1789, they revolutionized European armies and played out on an unprecedented scale, mainly due to the application of modern mass conscription. French power rose quickly, conquering most of Europe by the end of the decade. The decade brought hard times.
On 9 November 1799 (18 Brumaire), Napoleon overthrew the French government, replacing it with the Consulate, in which he was First Consul. On 2 December 1804, after a failed assassination plot, he crowned himself Emperor. In 1805, Napoleon planned to invade Britain, but a renewed British alliance with Russia and Austria (Third Coalition), forced him to turn his attention towards the continent, while at the same time failure to lure the superior British fleet away from the English Channel, ending in a decisive French defeat at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October put an end to hopes of an invasion of Britain. On 2 December 1805, Napoleon defeated a numerically superior Austro-Russian army at Austerlitz, forcing Austria's withdrawal from the coalition ("see Treaty of Pressburg") and dissolving the Holy Roman Empire. In 1806, a Fourth Coalition was set up, on 14 October Napoleon defeated the Prussians at the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt, marched through Germany and defeated the Russians on 14 June 1807 at Friedland. The Treaties of Tilsit divided Europe between France and Russia and created the Duchy of Warsaw.
The War of the Fifth Coalition, fought in the year 1809, pitted a coalition of the Austrian Empire and the United Kingdom against the French Empire and Bavaria. Major engagements between France and Austria, the main participants, unfolded over much of Central Europe from April to July, with very high casualty rates. Britain, already involved on the European continent in the ongoing Peninsular War, sent another expedition, the Walcheren Campaign, to the Netherlands in order to relieve the Austrians, although this effort had little impact on the outcome of the conflict. After much campaigning in Bavaria and across the Danube valley, the war ended favorably for the French after the bloody struggle at Wagram in early July, resulting in the Treaty of Schönbrunn . Although fighting in the Iberian Peninsula continued, the War of the Fifth Coalition was the last major conflict on the European continent until the French invasion of Russia in 1812 sparked the Sixth Coalition.
Slavery.
This decade marked the height of the Atlantic slave trade to the United States. During the period of 1798 and 1808, approximately 200,000 slaves were imported from Africa to the United States. Still, the abolitionist movement began to gain ground in this period. Britain enacted the Slave Trade Act 1807, which barred the trade of slaves in Great Britain (though slavery was still legal). The United States enacted a similar ban in 1808. However, Napoleon revoked the French Empire's ban on slavery with the Law of 20 May 1802.
Science and technology.
Electricity.
This decade contained some of the earliest experiments in electrochemistry. In 1800 Alessandro Volta constructed a voltaic pile, the first device to produce a large electric current, later known as the electric battery. Napoleon, informed of his works, summoned him in 1801 for a command performance of his experiments. He received many medals and decorations, including the Légion d'honneur.
Also in 1800, William Nicholson and Johann Wilhelm Ritter succeeded in decomposing water into hydrogen and oxygen by electrolysis. Soon thereafter Ritter discovered the process of electroplating. He also observed that the amount of metal deposited and the amount of oxygen produced during an electrolytic process depended on the distance between the electrodes. By 1801 Ritter observed thermoelectric currents and anticipated the discovery of thermoelectricity by Thomas Johann Seebeck.
In 1806, Humphry Davy decomposed potash and soda, employing a voltaic pile of approximately 250 cells, showing that these substances were respectively the oxides of potassium and sodium, which metals previously had been unknown. Employing a battery of 2,000 elements of a voltaic pile and charcoal enclosed in a vacuum, Davy gave the first public demonstration of the electric arc lamp in 1809.
Transportation.
Steam travel started to become viable during this decade. In 1803, William Symington's "Charlotte Dundas", generally considered to be the world's first practical steamboat, made her first voyage. Later, in 1807, Robert Fulton's "North River Steamboat", the world's first commercially successful steamboat, made her maiden voyage.
In 1801, Richard Trevithick ran a full-sized steam 'road locomotive' on the road in Camborne, England, followed by his 10-seater London Steam Carriage in 1803. In 1804, Trevithick built a prototype steam-powered railway locomotive.
The first railway began operating during this time. The Surrey Iron Railway in Great Britain was established by the British Parliament in 1801, and began operation on 26 July 1803. The railway relied on horse-drawn cars rather than trains.
In 1807, Isaac de Rivas made a hydrogen gas-powered vehicle, the first vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine.
James Watt creates first steam engine based on Newcomen's design.
Culture.
Fashion.
Fashion in this period in European and European-influenced countries saw the final triumph of undress or informal styles over the brocades, lace, periwig, and powder of the earlier eighteenth century.
 Fashionable women's clothing styles were based on the Empire silhouette — dresses were closely fitted to the torso just under the bust, falling loosely below. Inspired by neoclassical tastes, the short-waisted gowns sported soft, flowing skirts and were often made of white, almost transparent muslin, which was easily washed and draped loosely like the garments on Greek and Roman statues. No respectable woman would leave the house without a hat or bonnet. The antique head-dress, or Queen Mary "coif", Chinese hat, Oriental inspired turban, and Highland helmet were popular. As for bonnets, their crowns and brims were adorned with increasingly elaborate ornamentations, such as feathers and ribbons. In fact, ladies of the day embellished their hats frequently, replacing old decorations with new trims or feathers.
1800–1809 was the height of dandyism in men's fashion in Europe, following the example of Beau Brummell. Older men, military officers, and those in conservative professions such as lawyers and physicians retained their wigs and powder into this period, but younger men of fashion wore their hair in short curls, often with long sideburns. This period saw the final abandonment of lace, embroidery, and other embellishment from serious men's clothing outside of formalized court dress. Instead, cut and tailoring became much more important as an indicator of quality.
Wikisource reference work.
 #if: 
 #if:  
 |, 
 #if: 
 }}{{
 #if: 
 #if: 
 | ()
 |{{
 #if: 
 #if: 
 | {{#if:||}}{{
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: {{
 #if: History of the United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |: {{
 #if: History of the United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 
 #if:  
 1801-1809
 #if: Adams
 }} {{Citation/make link
 | 1={{
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #if: 
 | 2="  
 #if:1801-1809| [1801-1809]
 #if: 
 }}{{
 #if: 
 }}{{
 #if: 
 }}{{
 #if: 
 }}{{
 #if: 
 | ( ed.)
 #if: 
 }}{{
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |,
 #if: Adams
 |{{
 #if: 1889-90
 |, 1889-90{{
 #if:
}}{{
 #if: 
 #ifeq: | 1889-90
 |{{
 #if: 
 #if: Adams
 | (published )
 |{{
 #if: 
 | (published )
}}{{
 #if: 
 |{{
 #if: {{
 #if: History of the United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |, {{
 #if: History of the United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #if: 
}}{{
 #if:
 | , {{#ifeq: | no
 | {{#if:
 |{{Citation/make link||{{#ifeq:|.|A|a}}rchived}} from the original
 |{{#ifeq:|.|A|a}}rchived
 | {{#ifeq:|.|A|a}}rchived{{#if:
 }}{{#if:| on }}{{
 |. {{citation error|nocat=
 #if:  
 |, {{
 #if: 
 |
 |, {{
 #if: 
 |
 }}{{
 #if: 
 | {{#ifeq:|,|, r|. R}}etrieved 
}}{{#if:
}}{{#if:
}}{{#if:
}}<span
 class="Z3988"
 title="ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&rft_val_fmt={{urlencode:info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:}}{{
 #if: 
 |journal&rft.genre=article&rft.atitle={{urlencode:  
 |book{{
 #if: 
 |&rft.genre=bookitem&rft.btitle={{urlencode:}}&rft.atitle={{urlencode:  
 |&rft.genre=book&rft.btitle={{urlencode:  
 #if: Adams |&rft.aulast={{urlencode:Adams}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: Adams |&rft.au={{urlencode:Adams}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: |&rft.au={{urlencode:}}{{
 }}{{
 #if: {{
 #if: History of the United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |&rft.pages={{urlencode: {{
 #if: History of the United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson
 #if: 
 #if: 
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 |{{
 #switch: book
 #if: 
 #if: 
 }}{{
 }}&rfr_id=info:sid/en.wikipedia.org:{{FULLPAGENAMEE}}"> 
 |IncludedWorkTitle = 
 |IncludedWorkURL = 
 |Other = History that in part contains six chapters of narration remarking upon significant individuals of that era with added wikilinks linking back to their Wikipedia articles
 |Edition = 
 |Place = New York
 |PublicationPlace = New York
 |Publisher = Charles Scribner's Sons. Wikisource
 |PublicationDate = 
 |EditorSurname1 = 
 |EditorSurname2 = 
 |EditorSurname3 = 
 |EditorSurname4 = 
 |EditorGiven1 = 
 |EditorGiven2=
 |EditorGiven3=
 |EditorGiven4=
 |Editorlink1=
 |Editorlink2=
 |Editorlink3=
 |Editorlink4=
 |language = 
 |format = 
 |ARXIV=
 |ASIN=
 |BIBCODE=
 |DOI=
 |DoiBroken=
 |ISBN=
 |ISSN=
 |JFM=
 |JSTOR=
 |LCCN=
 |MR=
 |OCLC=
 |OL=
 |OSTI=
 |PMC=
 |Embargo=1010-10-10
 |PMID=
 |RFC=
 |SSRN=
 |ZBL=
 |ID=
 |AccessDate=
 |DateFormat=none
 |quote = 
 |laysummary = 
 |laydate = 
 |Ref=
 |Sep = .
 |PS = .
 |AuthorSep = ; 
 |NameSep = , 
 |Trunc = 8
 |amp = 

</doc>
<doc id="34703" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34703" title="1991">
1991

1991 ()
will be .
It was the year that is usually considered the final year of the Cold War that had begun in the late 1940s. During the year, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics collapsed into fifteen sovereign republics. India also abandoned its policies of socialism and autarky and began extensive neoliberal changes to its economy in July 1991 which would increase the GDP but also economic inequality over the next two decades. A U.N.-authorized coalition force from thirty-four nations fought against Iraq, which had invaded Kuwait in the previous year, 1990. The conflict would be called the Gulf War and would mark the beginning of a since-constant American military presence in the Middle East. The clash between Serbia and the other Yugoslav republics would lead into the beginning of the Yugoslav Wars.
The Japanese asset price bubble collapsed this year, leading to the Lost Years and a permanently stagnated (though still prosperous) Japanese economy.

</doc>
<doc id="34704" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34704" title="1801">
1801

Year 1801 (MDCCCI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar. It was also the first year of the 19th century.

</doc>
<doc id="34705" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34705" title="1809">
1809

Year 1809 (MDCCCIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34706" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34706" title="1833">
1833

Year 1833 (MDCCCXXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34707" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34707" title="1890">
1890

Year 1890 (MDCCCXC) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34708" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34708" title="1940">
1940

1940 ()
will be .
Events.
Below, the events of World War II have the "WWII" prefix.

</doc>
<doc id="34709" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34709" title="1707">
1707

Year 1707 (MDCCVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Tuesday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34710" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34710" title="1700s (decade)">
1700s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34711" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34711" title="1889">
1889

Year 1889 (MDCCCLXXXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.
Deaths.
July–December.
"unknown date"

</doc>
<doc id="34712" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34712" title="1888">
1888

Year 1888 (MDCCCLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (click on link for calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the, at the time 12-day slower Julian calendar. In Germany, 1888 is known as the Year of the Three Emperors. Currently, it is the year that, when written in Roman numerals, has the most digits (13). This will be surpassed as late as 2888.

</doc>
<doc id="34713" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34713" title="1893">
1893

Year 1893 (MDCCCXCIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.
Births.
Date unknown.
Otto Eppers, American cartoonist (d. 1955)
Henry Matthew Talintyre, British artist (d. 1962)
Russell Johnson, cartoonist (d. 1995)

</doc>
<doc id="34714" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34714" title="1897">
1897

Year 1897 (MDCCCXCVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34715" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34715" title="1885">
1885

Year 1885 (MDCCCLXXXV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34716" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34716" title="1881">
1881

Year 1881 (MDCCCLXXXI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.
Deaths.
July–December.
"date unknown"

</doc>
<doc id="34717" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34717" title="1962">
1962

1962 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34718" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34718" title="1597">
1597

Year 1597 (MDXCVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34719" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34719" title="1690">
1690

Year 1690 (MDCXC) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34720" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34720" title="1764">
1764

Year 1764 (MDCCLXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Publications.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34721" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34721" title="1760s">
1760s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 
Births.
 Tecumseh

</doc>
<doc id="34722" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34722" title="1742">
1742

Year 1742 (MDCCXLII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34723" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34723" title="1282">
1282

Year 1282 (MCCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topics.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34724" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34724" title="1921">
1921

1921 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34725" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34725" title="1876">
1876

Year 1876 (MDCCCLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34726" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34726" title="1970">
1970

1970 ()
will be .
Deaths.
May.
1876)

</doc>
<doc id="34727" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34727" title="1735">
1735

Year 1735 (MDCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34728" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34728" title="1730s">
1730s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34729" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34729" title="1740s">
1740s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34730" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34730" title="1790s">
1790s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34731" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34731" title="1890s">
1890s

The 1890s, which began on 1 January 1890 and ended on 31 December 1899, were sometimes referred to as the "Mauve Decade" – because William Henry Perkin's aniline dye allowed the widespread use of that colour in fashion – and also as the "Gay Nineties", under the then-current usage of the word "gay" which referred simply to merriment and frivolity. The phrase, "The Gay Nineties," was not coined until 1926. This decade was also part of the Gilded Age, a phrase coined by Mark Twain, alluding to the seemingly profitable era that was riddled with crime. In the United States, the 1890s were marked by a severe economic depression sparked by the Panic of 1893, as well as several strikes in the industrial workforce. As of 6 April 2015, there are only 3 verified living people who were born in the 1890s.
Popular culture.
Sports.
1896 saw the first edition of the modern Olympic Games.
Further reading.
</dl>

</doc>
<doc id="34732" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34732" title="1850s">
1850s

The 1850s decade ran from January 1, 1850, to December 31, 1859.
Assassinations.
The 1850s were marked by several notable assassinations and assassination attempts:

</doc>
<doc id="34733" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34733" title="1688">
1688

Year 1688 (MDCLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34734" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34734" title="622">
622

Year 622 (DCXXII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 622 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Deaths.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34735" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34735" title="7th century">
7th century

The 7th century is the period from 601 to 700 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. The Muslim conquests began with the unification of Arabia by Muhammad starting in 622. After Muhammad's death in 632, Islam expanded beyond the Arabian Peninsula under the Rashidun Caliphate (632–661) and the Umayyad Caliphate (661–750). The Islamic conquest of Persia in the 7th century led to the downfall of the Sassanid Empire. Also conquered during the 7th century were Syria, Palestine, Armenia, Egypt, and North Africa.
The Byzantine Empire continued suffering setbacks during the rapid expansion of the Arab Empire.
In the Iberian Peninsula, the 7th century was the "Siglo de Concilios", that is, century of councils, referring to the Councils of Toledo.
Harsha united Northern India, which had reverted to small republics and states after the fall of the Gupta Empire in the 6th century.
In China, the Sui dynasty was replaced by the Tang dynasty, which set up its military bases from Korea to Central Asia, and was next to the Arabian later. China began to reach its height. Silla allied itself with the Tang Dynasty, subjugating Baekje and defeating Goguryeo to unite the Korean Peninsula under one ruler. The Asuka period persisted in Japan throughout the 7th century.

</doc>
<doc id="34736" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34736" title="620s">
620s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34738" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34738" title="10th century">
10th century

The 10th century is the period from 901 to 1000 in accordance with the Julian calendar, and the last century of the 1st millennium.
In China the Song Dynasty was established. The Muslim World, experienced a cultural zenith, especially in Spain under the Caliphate of Córdoba. Additionally, the 10th century was the zenith for the Byzantine and Bulgarian Empires.
Medievalist and historian of technology Lynn White said that "to the modern eye, it is very nearly the darkest of the Dark Ages", but concluded that ". . . if it was dark, it was the darkness of the womb." Similarly, Helen Waddell wrote that the 10th century was that which "in the textbooks disputes with the seventh the bad eminence, the nadir of the human intellect." In the 15th century, Lorenzo Valla described it as the Century of Lead and Iron and later Cardinal Baronius as the Leaden Century or Iron Century.
According to one estimate, the tenth century saw fewer deaths in war (as a percentage of the total population) than any other century since 3000 B.C.

</doc>
<doc id="34739" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34739" title="9th century">
9th century

The 9th century is the period from 801 to 900 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era.
West Africa.
Southeastern Nigeria.
Around the 9th century the Igbo people of what is now southeastern Nigeria developed bronze casts of humans, animals, and mythical creatures. These bronzes, which were used as vessels, amulets, pendants, and sacrificial tools, are among the earliest made bronzes ever found in Nigeria. Most items were part of a burial of a nobleman of the Nri-Igbo culture in the northern part of Igboland. Long distance trading was also discovered through the thousands of glass beads found at the sites. The discovery of the bronzes was made by locals from Igbo Ukwu, and they mark the start of the development of the Nri Kingdom.
Ghana Empire.
The Ghana (Wagadu) Empire (before c. 830 until c. 1235) was located in what is now southeastern Mauritania and western Mali. It is considered the first of the Sahelian Kingdoms, which would exist in some form until the early 20th century.
Western Europe.
British Isles.
Britain experienced a great influx of Viking peoples in the 9th century as the Viking Age continued from the previous century. The kingdoms of the Heptarchy were gradually conquered by the Danes, who set up Anglo-Saxon puppet rulers in each kingdom. This invasion was achieved by a huge military force known as the Great Heathen Army, which was supposedly led by Ivar the Boneless, Halfdan Ragnarsson, and Guthrum. This Danish army first arrived in Britain in 865 in East Anglia. After conquering that kingdom, the army proceeded to capture the city of York (Jorvik) and establish the kingdom of Jorvik. The Danes went on to subjugate the kingdom of Northumbria and to take all but the western portion of Mercia. The remaining kingdom of Wessex was the only kingdom of the Heptarchy left. Alfred the Great managed to maintain his kingdom of Wessex and push back the Viking incursions, relieving the neighbouring kingdoms from the threat of the Danes following his famous victory over them at the Battle of Ethandun in 878. Alfred re-established Anglo-Saxon rule over the western half of Mercia, and the Danelaw was established which separated Mercia into halves, the eastern half remaining under the control of the Danes.
Ireland was also affected by the Viking expansion across the North Sea. Extensive raids were carried out all along the coast and eventually permanent settlements were established, such as that of Dublin in 841. Particular targets for these raids were the monasteries on the western coast of Ireland, as they provided a rich source for loot. On such raids the Vikings set up impermanent camps, which were called longphorts by the Irish—this period of Viking raids on the coasts of Ireland has been named the longphort phase after these types of settlements. Ireland in the 9th century was organised into an amalgam of small kingdoms, called tuatha. These kingdoms were sometimes grouped together and ruled by a single, provincial ruler. If such a ruler could establish and maintain authority over a portion of these tuatha, he was sometimes granted the title of High King.
Scotland also experienced significant Viking incursions during the 9th century. The Vikings established themselves in coastal regions, usually in northern Scotland, and in the northern islands such as Orkney and Shetland. The Viking invasion and settlement in Scotland provided a contributing factor in the collapse of the kingdoms of the Picts, who inhabited most of Scotland at the time. Not only were the Pictish realms either destroyed or severely weakened, the Viking invasion and settlement may have been the reason for the movement of Kenneth MacAlpin, the king of Dál Riata at that time. The kingdom of Dál Riata was located on the western coast of Scotland, and Viking incursions destroyed it after the death of its previous king, Áed mac Boanta in 839, according to the Annals of Ulster. This may have caused the new king, MacAlpin, to move to the east, and conquer the remnants of the Pictish realms. MacAlpin became king of the Picts in 843 and later kings would be titled as the King of Alba or King of Scots.
Art of the 9th century.
Art in the 9th century was primarily dedicated to the Gospel and employed as basic tools of the Roman Catholic mass. Thousands of golden art objects were made: Sacred cups, vessels, reliqueries, crucifixes, rosaries, altar pieces, and statues of the Virgin and Child or Saints all kept the flame of art from dying out. Architecture began to revive to some extent by the 9th century, taking the form of Church facilities of all kinds, and the first castle fortifications since Roman times began to take form in simple "moat and baily" castles, or simple "strong point" tower structures, with little refinement.
See also.
Timeline of 9th-century Muslim history

</doc>
<doc id="34740" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34740" title="8th century">
8th century

The 8th century is the period from 701 to 800 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. In the Middle East, the coast of North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula quickly come under Islamic Arab domination. The westward expansion of the Arab Empire was famously halted at the Siege of Constantinople by the Byzantine Empire and the Battle of Tours by the Franks. The tide of Arab conquest came to an end in the middle of the 8th century.
In Europe, late in the century, the Vikings, seafaring peoples from Scandinavia, begin raiding the coasts of Europe and the Mediterranean, and go on to found several important kingdoms.
In Asia, the Pala Empire is founded in Bengal. The Tang Dynasty reaches its pinnacle under Chinese Emperor Xuanzong. The Nara period begins in Japan.

</doc>
<doc id="34741" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34741" title="6th century">
6th century

The 6th century is the period from 501 to 600 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. In the West this century marks the end of Classical Antiquity and the beginning of the Middle Ages. Following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire late in the previous century, Europe fractured into many small Germanic Kingdoms, which competed fiercely for land and wealth. From this upheaval the Franks rose to prominence, and carved out a sizeable domain encompassing much of modern France and Germany. Meanwhile, the surviving Eastern Roman Empire began to expand under the emperor Justinian, who eventually recaptured North Africa from the Vandals, and attempted to fully recover Italy as well in the hope of re-establishing Roman control over the lands once ruled by the Western Roman Empire. 
During its second Golden Age, the Sassanid Empire reached the peak of its power under Khosrau I in the 6th century. The classical Gupta Empire of Northern India, largely overrun by the Huna, ended in the mid-6th century. In Japan, the Kofun period gave way to the Asuka period. After being divided for more than 150 years into the Southern and Northern Dynasties, China was reunited under the Sui Dynasty toward the end of the 6th century. The Three Kingdoms of Korea persisted throughout the 6th century. The Göktürks became a major power in Central Asia after defeating the Rouran.
In the Americas, Teotihuacan began to decline in the 6th century after having reached its zenith between AD 150 and 450. Classic Period of the Maya civilization in Central America.

</doc>
<doc id="34742" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34742" title="5th century">
5th century

The 5th century is the time period from 401 to 500 in accordance with the Julian calendar in Anno Domini / Common Era. The 5th century is noted for being a time of repeated disaster and instability both internally and externally for the Western Roman Empire, which finally collapsed, and came to an end in AD 476. The west was ruled by a succession of weak emperors, and true power began to fall increasingly into the hands of powerful generals. Internal instability and the pressing military problem of foreign invaders resulted in the ransacking of Rome by a Visigoth army in 410. Some recovery took place during the following decades, but the Western Empire received another serious blow when a second barbarian group, the Vandals, occupied Carthage, capital of the extremely important province of Africa. Attempts to retake the province were interrupted by the invasion of the Huns under Attila. After Attila's defeat, both Eastern and Western empires joined forces for a final assault on Vandal North Africa, but this campaign was a spectacular failure.

</doc>
<doc id="34743" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34743" title="3rd century">
3rd century

The 3rd century was the period from 201 to 300 A.D.
In this century, the Roman Empire saw a crisis, marking the beginning of Late Antiquity. In Persia, the Parthian Empire was succeeded by the Sassanid Empire.
In India, the Kushan Empire was replaced by the Gupta Empire. China was in the Three Kingdoms period. The Xiongnu formed the Tiefu state under Liu Qubei. Korea was ruled by the Three Kingdoms of Korea. Japan entered the Kofun period.
At about this time in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Bantu expansion reached Southern Africa.
In Pre-Columbian America, the Adena culture of the Ohio River valley declined in favor of the Hopewell culture. The Maya civilization entered its Classic Era.
Roman Empire.
After the death of Commodus in the previous century the Roman Empire was plunged into a civil war. When the dust settled, Septimius Severus emerged as emperor, establishing the Severan dynasty. Unlike previous emperors, he openly used the army to back his authority, and paid them well to do so. The regime he created is known as the Military Monarchy as a result. The system fell apart in the 230s, giving way to a fifty-year period known as the Military Anarchy or the Crisis of the Third Century, where no fewer than twenty emperors held the reins of power, most for only a few months. The majority of these men were assassinated, or killed in battle, and the empire almost collapsed under the weight of the political upheaval, as well as the growing Persian threat in the east. Under its new Sassanid rulers, Persia had grown into a rival superpower, and the Romans would have to make drastic reforms in order to better prepare their state for a confrontation. These reforms were finally realized late in the century under the reign of Diocletian, one of them being to divide the empire into an eastern and western half, and have a separate ruler for each.

</doc>
<doc id="34744" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34744" title="2nd century">
2nd century

The 2nd century is the period from 101 to 200 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. It is considered part of the "Classical era, epoch, or historical period".
Early in the century, the Roman Empire attained its greatest expansion under the emperor Trajan, but after his death became primarily defensive for the rest of its history. Much prosperity took place throughout the empire at this time, ruled as it were by the Five Good Emperors, a succession of just and able rulers.
This period also saw the removal of the Jews from Jerusalem during the reign of Hadrian after Bar Kokhba's revolt.
The last quarter of the century saw the end of the period of peace and prosperity known as the Pax Romana at the death of the emperor Marcus Aurelius, last of the "Five Good Emperors", and the accession of his ineffective and deranged son Commodus.
Although the Han Dynasty of China was firmly cemented into power and extended its imperial influence into Central Asia during the first half of the century, by the second half there was widespread corruption and open rebellion. This set in motion its ultimate decline, until it was overthrown in 220.

</doc>
<doc id="34745" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34745" title="1807">
1807

Year 1807 (MDCCCVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34746" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34746" title="1873">
1873

Year 1873 (MDCCCLXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34747" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34747" title="1797">
1797

1797 (MDCCXCVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Undated.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34748" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34748" title="1971">
1971

1971 ()
will be .
The world population increased by 2.1% this year; the highest it ever did in history.

</doc>
<doc id="34749" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34749" title="1967">
1967

1967 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34750" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34750" title="1965">
1965

1965 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34751" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34751" title="1973">
1973

1973 ()
will be .
Births.
June.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34752" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34752" title="1975">
1975

1975 ()
will be .
It was also declared the "International Women's Year" by the United Nations and the European Architectural Heritage Year by the Council of Europe.

</doc>
<doc id="34753" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34753" title="1978">
1978

1978 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34754" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34754" title="1979">
1979

1979 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34755" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34755" title="1983">
1983

1983 ()
will be .
The year 1983 saw both the official beginning of the Internet and the first mobile cellular telephone call.
Events.
September.
Children's TV show Rocky Hollow released in the U.K
Births.
June.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34756" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34756" title="1982">
1982

1982 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34757" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34757" title="1573">
1573

Year 1573 (MDLXXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34758" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34758" title="1570s">
1570s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34759" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34759" title="1574">
1574

Year 1574 (MDLXXIV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Undated.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34760" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34760" title="1987">
1987

1987 ()
will be .
In fiction.
The following are references to year 1987 in fiction:

</doc>
<doc id="34761" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34761" title="1986">
1986

1986 ()
will be .
The year 1986 was designated as the International Year of Peace by the United Nations.

</doc>
<doc id="34762" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34762" title="1857">
1857

Year 1857 (MDCCCLVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34763" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34763" title="1875">
1875

Year 1875 (MDCCCLXXV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34764" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34764" title="1796">
1796

1796 (MDCCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34765" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34765" title="1720s">
1720s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34766" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34766" title="1728">
1728

Year 1728 (MDCCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34767" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34767" title="1871">
1871

Year 1871 (MDCCCLXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34768" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34768" title="1872">
1872

Year 1872 (MDCCCLXXII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34769" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34769" title="1870">
1870

Year 1870 (MDCCCLXX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34770" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34770" title="1874">
1874

Year 1874 (MDCCCLXXIV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34771" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34771" title="1877">
1877

Year 1877 (MDCCCLXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34772" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34772" title="1882">
1882

Year 1882 (MDCCCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34773" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34773" title="1880">
1880

Year 1880 (MDCCCLXXX) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34774" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34774" title="1880s">
1880s

The 1880s was a decade that began on January 1, 1880 and ended on December 31, 1889. They occurred at the core period of the Second Industrial Revolution. Most Western countries experienced a large economic boom, due to the mass production of railroads and other more convenient methods of travel. The modern city as well as the sky-scraper rose to prominence in this decade as well, contributing to the economic prosperity of the time. The 1880s were also part of the Gilded Age, which lasted from 1874 to 1907.
Assassinations.
The 1880s were marked by several notable assassinations and assassination attempts:

</doc>
<doc id="34775" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34775" title="1932">
1932

1932 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34776" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34776" title="1981">
1981

1981 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34777" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34777" title="1887">
1887

Year 1887 (MDCCCLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34778" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34778" title="1436">
1436

Year 1436 (MCDXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34779" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34779" title="1476">
1476

Year 1476 (MCDLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
January–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34780" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34780" title="405">
405

Year 405 (CDV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Stilicho and Anthemius (or, less frequently, year 1158 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 405 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34781" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34781" title="1854">
1854

Year 1854 (MDCCCLIV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34782" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34782" title="1542">
1542

Year 1542 (MDXLII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34783" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34783" title="1540s">
1540s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34784" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34784" title="1860">
1860

Year 1860 (MDCCCLX) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34785" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34785" title="1862">
1862

Year 1862 (MDCCCLXII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day later Julian calendar. This year was named by Mitchell Stephens as the greatest year to read newspapers.

</doc>
<doc id="34787" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34787" title="1867">
1867

Year 1867 (MDCCCLXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34788" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34788" title="1868">
1868

Year 1868 (MDCCCLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34789" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34789" title="1869">
1869

Year 1869 (MDCCCLXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34790" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34790" title="1899">
1899

1899 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34791" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34791" title="1898">
1898

Year 1898 (MDCCCXCVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar.
References.
</dl>

</doc>
<doc id="34792" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34792" title="1894">
1894

Year 1894 (MDCCCXCIV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34793" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34793" title="1892">
1892

Year 1892 (MDCCCXCII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34794" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34794" title="1891">
1891

Year 1891 (MDCCCXCI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34795" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34795" title="1830s">
1830s

The 1830s decade ran from January 1, 1830 to December 31, 1839.
Politics and wars.
East Asia.
China.
China was ruled by Daoguang Emperor of the Qing Dynasty during the 1830s. The decade witnessed a rapid rise in the sale of opium in China, despite efforts by Daoguang to end the trade. A turning point came in 1834, with the end of the monopoly of the British East India Company, leaving trade in the hands of private entrepreneurs. By 1838, opium sales climbed to 40,000 chests. In 1839, newly appointed imperial commissioner Lin Zexu banned the sale of opium and imposed several restrictions on all foreign traders. Lin also closed the channel to Canton, leading to the seizure and destruction of 20,000 chests of opium. The United Kingdom retaliated, seizing Hong Kong on August 23 of that year, starting what would be known as the First Opium War. It would end three years later with the signing of the Treaty of Nanking in 1842.
Northern Europe.
United Kingdom.
Royalty.
In 1830, William IV succeeded his brother George IV as King of the United Kingdom. Upon his death in 1837, his 18-year-old niece Queen Victoria acceded to the throne. where she would reign for more than 63 years. Under Salic law, the Kingdom of Hanover passes to William's brother, Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, ending the personal union of Britain and Hanover which has persisted since 1714. Queen Victoria took up residence in Buckingham Palace, the first reigning British monarch to make this, rather than St James's Palace, her London home.
Politics and Law.
The United Kingdom had four prime ministers during the 1830s. As the decade began, Tory Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington led parliament. Wellington's government fell in late 1830, failing to react to calls for reform. The Whigs selected Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey to succeed him, who led passage of many reforms, including the Reform Act 1832, the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 (abolishing slavery throughout the British Empire), and the Factory Acts (limiting child labour).
In 1834 Grey retired from public life, leaving Lord Melbourne as his successor. Reforms continued under Lord Melbourne, with the Poor Law Amendment Act in 1834, which stated that no able-bodied British man could receive assistance unless he entered a workhouse. King William IV's opposition to the Whigs' reforming ways led him to dismiss Melbourne in November and then appoint Sir Robert Peel to form a Tory government. Peel's failure to win a House of Commons majority in the resulting general election (January 1835) made it impossible for him to govern, and the Whigs returned to power under Melbourne in April 1835. The Marriage Act 1836 established civil marriage and registration systems that permit marriages in nonconformist chapels, and a Registrar General of Births, Marriages, and Deaths.
There were protests and significant unrest during the decade. In May and June 1831 in Wales, coal miners and others rioted for improved working conditions in what was known as the Merthyr Rising. William Howley Archbishop of Canterbury has his coach attacked by an angry mob on his first official visit to Canterbury in 1832. In 1834, Robert Owen organized the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union, an early attempt to form a national union confederation. In May 1838, the People's Charter was drawn up in the United Kingdom, demanding universal suffrage. Chartism continued to gain popularity, leading to the Newport Rising in 1839, the last large-scale armed rebellion against authority in mainland Britain.
In 1835, James Pratt and John Smith were hanged outside Newgate Prison in London after a conviction of sodomy, the last deadly victims of the judicial persecution of homosexual men in England.
Africa.
French conquest of Algeria.
In 1830, France invaded and quickly seized Ottoman Regency of Algiers, and rapidly took control of other coastal communities. Fighting would continue throughout the decade, with the French pitted against forces under Ahmed Bey at Constantine, primarily in the east, and nationalist forces in Kabylie and the west. The French made treaties with the nationalists under `Abd al-Qādir, enabling them to capture Constantine in 1837. Al-Qādir continued to give stiff resistance in the west, which lasted throughout the decade (and well into the 1840s, with Al-Qādir surrendering in 1847).
Science and Technology.
Electricity.
Many key discoveries about electricity were made in the 1830s. Electromagnetic induction was discovered independently by Michael Faraday and Joseph Henry in 1831; however, Faraday was the first to publish the results of his experiments. Electromagnetic induction is the production of a potential difference (voltage) across a conductor when it is exposed to a varying magnetic field. This discovery was essential to the invention of transformers, inductors, and many types of electrical motors, generators and solenoids.
In 1834, Michael Faraday's published his research regarding the quantitative relationships in electrochemical reactions, now known as Faraday's laws of electrolysis. Also in 1834, Jean C. A. Peltier discovered the Peltier "effect", which is the presence of heating or cooling at an electrified junction of two different conductors. In 1836, John Daniell invented a primary cell in which hydrogen was eliminated in the generation of the electricity.

</doc>
<doc id="34796" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34796" title="1820s">
1820s

The 1820s decade ran from January 1, 1820, to December 31, 1829.
Politics and wars.
East Asia.
Indonesia.
Java War.
The Java War (also known as the "Diponegoro War") was fought in Java between 1825 and 1830. It started as a rebellion led by Prince Diponegoro after the Dutch decided to build a road across a piece of his property that contained his parents' tomb.
The troops of Prince Diponegoro were very successful in the beginning, controlling the middle of Java and besieging Yogyakarta. Furthermore the Javanese population was supportive of Prince Diponegoro's cause, whereas the Dutch colonial authorities were initially very indecisive. As the Java war prolonged, Prince Diponegoro had difficulties in maintaining the numbers of his troops. Prince Diponegoro started a fierce guerrilla war and it was not until 1827 that the Dutch army gained the upper hand. The Dutch colonial army was able to fill its ranks with troops from Sulawesi, and later on from the Netherlands.
The rebellion finally ended in 1830, after Prince Diponegoro was tricked into entering Dutch custody near Magelang, believing he was there for negotiations for a possible cease-fire. It is estimated that 200,000 died over the course of the conflict, 8,000 being Dutch.
Europe.
Southern Europe.
Greek War of Independence.
At the start of the decade, most of Greece was under the rule of the Ottoman Empire, as it had been since 1453, despite frequent revolts. In early 1821, a secret organization called the Filiki Eteria instigated several battles that, together with the blessing of a Greek flag and proclamation of uprising by Bishop Germanos of Patras on March 25, marked the beginning of the revolution. The uprising successfully established a foothold in the Peloponnese, seizing Tripolitsa in September 1821, and had some success in Crete, Macedonia and Central Greece.
Between 1821 and 1824, first and second national assemblies were held, and the constitutions of 1822 and of 1823 were established. However, revolutionary activity was fragmented, resulting in the civil wars of 1824–1825. The Greek side withstood the Turkish attacks because, during this period, the Ottoman military campaigns were periodic and uncoordinated.
That changed when the Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II negotiated with Mehmet Ali of Egypt, who agreed to send his son Ibrahim Pasha to Greece with an army to suppress the revolt in return for territorial gain. Ibrahim landed in the Peloponnese in February 1825 and secured most of the peninsula by the end of 1825. He then helped break the siege of Missolonghi. Although Ibrahim was defeated in Mani, he had succeeded in suppressing most of the revolt in the Peloponnese and Athens had been retaken.
Following years of negotiation, three Great Powers, Russia, the United Kingdom and France had come to agree to the formation of an autonomous Greek state under Ottoman suzerainty, as stipulated in the Treaty of London. Ottoman refusal to accept these terms led to the Battle of Navarino, which effectively secured complete Greek independence. That year, the Third National Assembly at Troezen established the First Hellenic Republic. With the help of a French expeditionary force, the Greeks drove the Turks out of the Peloponnese and proceeded to the captured part of Central Greece by 1828. As a result of years of negotiation, Greece was finally recognized as an independent nation in May 1832.
Western Europe.
United Kingdom.
In the 1820s, the British government was formally headed by King George IV, but in practice, was led by his Prime Ministers Lord Liverpool (1812–1827), George Canning (1827), Lord Goderich (1827–1828), and Duke of Wellington (1828–1830). This decade was largely peaceful for Britain, with some foreign intervention. The British supported the Portuguese liberals in the Liberal Wars, and supported Greek rebels in the war for independence. During this time, London became the largest city of the world, taking the lead from Beijing.
Domestic tensions ran high at the start of the decade, with the Peterloo Massacre (1819), the Cato Street Conspiracy (1820), and the Radical War (1820) in Scotland. However, by the end of the 1820s, many repressive laws were repealed. In 1822, Britain repealed the death penalty for over 100 crimes, and punishments such as drawing and quartering and flagellation fell out of use. Seditious Meetings Prevention Act (barring large assemblies) and the Combination Act (banning trade unions) were repealed in 1824. The Catholic Relief Act by Parliament of the United Kingdom granted a substantial measure of Catholic Emancipation in Britain and Ireland.
North America.
United States.
At the beginning of the 1820s, the United States stretched from the Atlantic Ocean through to (roughly) the western edge of the Mississippi basin, though Florida, Michigan, Wisconsin and all present-day states fully west of the Mississippi had yet to be granted statehood. Two states were admitted to the union during this decade: Maine in 1820, and Missouri in 1821. The Adams–Onís Treaty, signed in 1819 and ratified by Spain in 1821, ceded Florida to the United States, and established a boundary between New Spain and the United States.
Slavery was widespread throughout the southern United States. According to the 1820 U.S. Census, the slave population at that time was 1,538,000. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 prohibited slavery in the former Louisiana Territory north of the parallel 36°30′ north except within the boundaries of the proposed state of Missouri. By the 1830 U.S. Census, the slave population had risen to 2,009,043. With the coordination of the American Colonization Society, many freed African-Americans repatriated to Africa during this decade to the newly formed colony of Liberia.
The political mood at the start of the 1820s was referred to as the Era of Good Feelings, following the collapse of the Federalist party. James Monroe, the sitting U.S President since 1817, was re-elected in 1820, virtually unopposed. In 1823, Monroe introduced the Monroe Doctrine in the State of the Union Address, declaring that any European attempts to recolonize the Americas would be considered a hostile act towards the United States.
The feeling of unity during the Monroe administration was dispelled in the presidential election of 1824, which due to an Electoral College stalemate, was decided in the United States House of Representatives. John Quincy Adams was chosen as the sixth U.S. President, despite receiving only 30.9% of the popular vote to Andrew Jackson's 41.3%. This gave rise to Jacksonian Nationalism and the rise of the modern Democratic Party, with Andrew Jackson elected in the 1828 election.
Mexico.
After ten years of civil war in Mexico (then called the "Viceroyalty of New Spain") and the death of two of its founders, by early 1820 the Mexican independence movement was stalemated and close to collapse. However, the Army of the Three Guarantees was formed under the command of Colonel Agustín de Iturbide with the support of patriots and loyalists to secure independence for Mexico and the protection of Roman Catholicism. Iturbide's army was joined by rebel forces from all over Mexico, and quickly gained control of Mexico. On August 24, 1821, representatives of the Spanish crown and Iturbide signed the Treaty of Córdoba, which recognized the Mexican Empire under the terms of the Plan of Iguala.
On September 27 the Army of the Three Guarantees entered Mexico City, and the following day Iturbide proclaimed the independence of the Mexican Empire. The newly formed Mexican congress eventually declared Iturbide emperor of Mexico on May 19, 1822. Later that year, Iturbide dissolved Congress and replaced it with a sympathetic junta. However, on March 19, 1823 Iturbide abdicated.
The First Federal Republic was established on October 4, 1824. In the new constitution, the republic took the name of United Mexican States, and was defined as a representative federal republic, with Catholicism as the official and unique religion.
Guadalupe Victoria was the first President of Mexico from 1824 until 1829.
After Manuel Gómez Pedraza won the election to succeed Victoria, Vicente Guerrero staged a coup d'état and took the presidency on April 1, 1829. Guerrero was deposed in a rebellion under Vice-President Anastasio Bustamante in December 1829.
Culture.
Poetry.
during The Battle of the Nile in 1798.
Fashion.
During the 1820s in European and European-influenced countries, fashionable women's clothing styles transitioned away from the classically-influenced "Empire"/"Regency" styles of ca. 1795–1820 (with their relatively unconfining empire silhouette) and re-adopted elements that had been characteristic of most of the 18th century (and were to be characteristic of the remainder of the 19th century), such as full skirts and clearly visible corseting of the natural waist.
The silhouette of men's fashion changed in similar ways: by the mid-1820s coats featured broad shoulders with puffed sleeves, a narrow waist, and full skirts. Trousers were worn for smart day wear, while breeches continued in use at court and in the country.

</doc>
<doc id="34797" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34797" title="1810s">
1810s

The 1810s decade ran from January 1, 1810, to December 31, 1819.
Politics and wars.
Napoleonic Wars.
In 1810, the French Empire reached its greatest extent. On the continent, the British and Portuguese remained restricted to the area around Lisbon and to besieged Cadiz. Napoleon married Marie-Louise, an Austrian Archduchess, with the aim of ensuring a more stable alliance with Austria and of providing the Emperor with an heir. As well as the French Empire, Napoleon controlled the Swiss Confederation, the Confederation of the Rhine, the Duchy of Warsaw and the Kingdom of Italy. Territories allied with the French included: the Kingdom of Spain, the Kingdom of Westphalia, the Kingdom of Naples, the Principality of Lucca and Piombino, and Napoleon's former enemies, Prussia and Austria. Denmark–Norway also allied with France in opposition to Great Britain and Sweden in the Gunboat War.
The French invasion of Russia of 1812 was a turning point, which reduced the French and allied invasion forces (the Grande Armée) to a tiny fraction of their initial strength and triggered a major shift in European politics, as it dramatically weakened the previously dominant French position on the continent. After the disastrous invasion of Russia, a coalition of Austria, Prussia, Russia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and a number of German States, and the rebels in Spain and Portugal united to battle France in the War of the Sixth Coalition. Two-and-a-half million troops fought in the conflict and the total dead amounted to as many as two million. This era included the battles of Smolensk, Borodino, Lützen, Bautzen, and the Dresden. It also included the epic Battle of Leipzig in October, 1813 (also known as the Battle of Nations), which was the largest battle of the Napoleonic wars, which drove Napoleon out of Germany.
The final stage of the War of the Sixth Coalition, the defense of France in 1814, saw the French Emperor temporarily repulse the vastly superior armies in the Six Days Campaign. Ultimately, the Allies occupied Paris, forcing Napoleon to abdicate and restoring the Bourbons. Napoleon was exiled to Elba. Also in 1814, Denmark–Norway was defeated by Great Britain and Sweden and had to cede the territory of mainland Norway to the King of Sweden at the Treaty of Kiel.
Napoleon shortly returned from exile, landing in France on March 1, 1815, marking the War of the Seventh Coalition, heading toward Paris while the Congress of Vienna was sitting. On March 13, seven days before Napoleon reached Paris, the powers at the Congress of Vienna ; four days later the United Kingdom, Russia, Austria and Prussia, members of the Seventh Coalition, bound themselves to put 150,000 men each into the field to end his rule. This set the stage for the last conflict in the Napoleonic Wars, the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo, the restoration of the French monarchy for the second time and the permanent exile of Napoleon to the distant island of Saint Helena, where he died in May 1821.
Spanish American wars of independence.
Spain in the 1810s was a country in turmoil. Occupied by Napoleon from 1808 to 1814, a massively destructive "war of independence" ensued, driven by an emergent Spanish nationalism. Already in 1810, the Caracas and Buenos Aires juntas declared their independence from the Bonapartist government in Spain and sent ambassadors to the United Kingdom. The British blockade against Spain had also moved most of the Latin American colonies out of the Spanish economic sphere and into the British sphere, with whom extensive trade relations were developed. The remaining Spanish colonies had operated with virtual independence from Madrid after their pronouncement against Joseph Bonaparte.
The Spanish government in exile (Cádiz Cortes) created the first modern Spanish constitution. Even so, agreements made at the Congress of Vienna (where Spain was represented by Pedro Gómez Labrador, Marquis of Labrador) would cement international support for the old, absolutist regime in Spain.
King Ferdinand VII, who assumed the throne after Napoleon was driven out of Spain, refused to agree to the liberal Spanish Constitution of 1812 on his accession to the throne in 1814. The Spanish Empire in the New World had largely supported the cause of Ferdinand VII over the Bonapartist pretender to the throne in the midst of the Napoleonic Wars. When Ferdinand's rule was restored, these juntas were cautious of abandoning their autonomy, and an alliance between local elites, merchant interests, nationalists, and liberals opposed to the abrogation of the Constitution of 1812 rose up against the Spanish in the New World.
The arrival of Spanish forces in the American colonies began in 1814, and was briefly successful in restoring central control over large parts of the Empire. Simón Bolívar, the leader of revolutionary forces in New Granada, was briefly forced into exile in British-controlled Jamaica, and independent Haiti. In 1816, however, Bolivar found enough popular support that he was able to return to South America, and in a daring march from Venezuela to New Granada (Colombia), he defeated Spanish forces at the Battle of Boyacá in 1819, ending Spanish rule in Colombia. Venezuela was liberated June 24, 1821 when Bolivar destroyed the Spanish army on the fields of Carabobo on the Battle of Carabobo. Argentina declared its independence in 1816 (though it had been operating with virtual independence as a British client since 1807 after successfully resisting a British invasion). Chile was retaken by Spain in 1814, but lost permanently in 1817 when an army under José de San Martín, for the first time in history, crossed the Andes Mountains from Argentina to Chile, and went on to defeat Spanish royalist forces at the Battle of Chacabuco in 1817.
Spain would also lose Florida to the United States during this decade. First, in 1810, the Republic of West Florida declared its independence from Spain, and was quickly annexed by the United States. Later, in 1818, the United States invaded Florida, resulting in the Adams-Onís Treaty, wherein Spain ceded the rest of Florida to the United States.
In 1820, Mexico, Peru, Ecuador, and Central America still remained under Spanish control. Although Mexico had been in revolt in 1811 under Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, resistance to Spanish rule had largely been confined to small guerrilla bands in the countryside. King Ferdinand was still dissatisfied with the loss of so much of the Empire and resolved to retake it. A large expedition was assembled in Cadiz with the aim of reconquest. However, Ferdinand's plans would be disrupted by Liberal Revolution, and Ferdinand was eventually forced to give up all of the New World colonies, except for Cuba and Puerto Rico.
War of 1812.
In 1812, the United States declared war on Britain in the War of 1812. The U.S. reasons for war included the humiliation in the "Chesapeake incident" of 1807, continued British impressment of American sailors into the Royal Navy, restrictions on trade with France, and arming hostile American Indians in Ohio and the western territories. United States President James Madison signed a declaration of war on June 18, 1812. 
The United States conducted two failed invasion attempts in 1812, first by General William Hull across the Detroit River into what is now Windsor, Ontario, and a second offensive at the Niagara peninsula. A major American success came in 1813, when the American Navy destroyed the British fleet on Lake Erie, and forced the British and their American Indian allies to retreat back toward Niagara. They were intercepted and destroyed by General William Henry Harrison at the Battle of the Thames in October 1813. Tecumseh, the leader of the tribal confederation, was killed, and his Indian coalition disintegrated.
At sea, the powerful Royal Navy blockaded much of the coastline, conducting frequent raids. The most famous episode was a series of British raids on the shores of Chesapeake Bay, including an attack on Washington that resulted in the British burning of the White House, the Capitol, the Navy Yard, and other public buildings, in the "Burning of Washington" in 1814. 
Once Napoleon was defeated in 1814, France and Britain became allies and Britain ended the trade restrictions and the impressment of American sailors. Running out of reasons for war and stuck in a military stalemate, the two countries signed the Treaty of Ghent on December 24, 1814. News of the peace treaty took two months to reach the U.S., during which fighting continued. In this interim, the British made one last major invasion, attempting to capture New Orleans, but were decisively defeated with very heavy losses by General Andrew Jackson at the Battle of New Orleans in January 1815. The ending of the war opened a long era of peaceful relations between the United States and the British Empire.
1804–1813 Russo-Persian War.
The 1804–1813 Russo-Persian War was one of the many wars between the Persian Empire and Imperial Russia, and was well underway at the beginning of the decade. In 1810, the Persians scaled up their efforts late in the war, declaring a holy war on Imperial Russia. However, Russia's superior technology and tactics ensured a series of strategic victories. Even when the French were in occupation of the Russian capital Moscow, Russian forces in the south were not recalled but continued their offensive against Persia, culminating in Pyotr Kotlyarevsky's victories at Aslanduz and Lenkoran, in 1812 and 1813 respectively. Upon the Persian surrender, the terms of the Treaty of Gulistan ceded the vast majority of the previously disputed territories to Imperial Russia. This led to the region's once-powerful khans being decimated and forced to pay homage to Russia.
Concert of Europe.
By 1815, Europe had been almost constantly at war. During this time, the military conquests of France had resulted in the spread of liberalism throughout much of the continent, resulting in many states adopting the Napoleonic code. Largely as a reaction to the radicalism of the French Revolution, the victorious powers of the Napoleonic Wars resolved to suppress liberalism and nationalism, and revert largely to the "status quo" of Europe prior to 1789.
The result was the Concert of Europe, also known as the "Congress System". It was the balance of power that existed in Europe from 1815 until the early 20th century. Its founding members were the United Kingdom, Austrian Empire, Russian Empire and Kingdom of Prussia, the members of the Quadruple Alliance responsible for the downfall of the First French Empire; in time France became established as a fifth member of the concert. At first, the leading personalities of the system were British foreign secretary Lord Castlereagh, Austrian chancellor Klemens Wenzel, Prince von Metternich and Tsar Alexander I of Russia.
The Kingdom of Prussia, Austrian Empire and Russian Empire formed the Holy Alliance with the expressed intent of preserving Christian social values and traditional monarchism. Every member of the coalition promptly joined the Alliance, save for the United Kingdom.
Among the meetings of the Powers in the latter part of the 1810s were the Congresses of Vienna (1814–1815), Aix-la-Chappelle (1818), and Carlsbad (1819).
Science and technology.
Steamboats.
The 1810s continued a trend of increasing commercial viability of steamboats in North America, following the early success of Robert Fulton and others in the preceding years. In 1811 the first in a continuously operating line of river steamboats left the dock at Pittsburgh to steam down the Ohio River to the Mississippi and on to New Orleans. Inventor John Stevens' boat, the "Juliana", began operation as the first steam-powered ferry October 11, 1811, with service between New York, and Hoboken, New Jersey. John Molson's PS "Accommodation" was the first steamboat on the St. Lawrence and in Canada. Unlike Fulton, Molson did not show a profit. Molson had also two paddle steamboats "Swiftsure" of 1811 and "Malsham" of 1813 with engines by B&W. The experience of these vessels, especially that they could now offer a regular service, being independent of wind and weather, helped make the new system of propulsion commercially viable, and as a result its application to the more open waters of the Great Lakes was next considered. That idea went on hiatus due to the War of 1812.
In a 25-day trip in 1815, the "Enterprise" further demonstrated the commercial potential of the steamboat with a 2,200-mile voyage from New Orleans to Pittsburgh. In 1817, a consortium in Sackets Harbor, New York funded the construction of the first US steamboat, "Ontario", to run on Lake Ontario and the Great Lakes, beginning the growth of lake commercial and passenger traffic.
The first commercially successful steamboat in Europe, Henry Bell's "Comet" of 1812, started a rapid expansion of steam services on the Firth of Clyde, and within four years a steamer service was in operation on the inland Loch Lomond, a forerunner of the lake steamers still gracing Swiss lakes. On the Clyde itself, within ten years of "Comet's" start in 1812 there were nearly fifty steamers, and services had started across the Irish Sea to Belfast and on many British estuaries. P.S."Thames", ex "Argyle" was the first seagoing steamer in Europe, having steamed from Glasgow to London in May 1815. P.S."Tug", the first tugboat, was launched by the Woods Brothers, Port Glasgow, on November 5, 1817; in the summer of 1817 she was the first steamboat to travel round the North of Scotland to the East Coast.
The first steamship credited with crossing the Atlantic Ocean between North America and Europe was the American ship "SS Savannah", though she was actually a hybrid between a steamship and a sailing ship. The "SS Savannah" left the port of Savannah, Georgia, on May 22, 1819, arriving in Liverpool, England, on June 20, 1819; her steam engine having been in use for part of the time on 18 days (estimates vary from 8 to 80 hours).
Culture.
Literature.
Lord Byron, regarded as one of the greatest British poets and remains widely read and influential, wrote his most well-known work during this decade. Amongst Byron's works are the brief poems "She Walks in Beauty", "When We Two Parted", and "So, we'll go no more a roving", in addition to the narrative poems "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage" and "Don Juan".
Other events in literature:

</doc>
<doc id="34798" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34798" title="4th century BC">
4th century BC

The 4th century BC started the first day of 400 BC and ended the last day of 301 BC. It is considered part of the Classical era, epoch, or historical period.
This century marked the height of Classical Greek civilization in all of its aspects. By the year 400 Greek philosophy, art, literature and architecture had spread far and wide, with the numerous independent Greek colonies that had sprung up throughout the lands of the eastern Mediterranean.
Arguably the most important series of political events in this period were the conquests of Alexander, bringing about the collapse of the once formidable Persian Empire and spreading Greek culture far into the east. Alexander dreamed of an east/west union, but when his short life ended, his vast empire was plunged into civil war as his generals each carved out their own separate kingdoms. Thus began the Hellenistic age, a period characterized by a more absolute approach to rule, with Greek kings taking on royal trappings and setting up hereditary successions. While a degree of democracy still existed in some of the remaining independent Greek cities, many scholars see this age as marking the end of classical Greece.
In India, the Mauryan Empire was founded in 322 BCE by Chandragupta Maurya, who had overthrown the Nanda Dynasty and rapidly expanded his power westwards across central and western India, taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers in the wake of the withdrawal westward by the Hellenic armies of Alexander.
China in the 4th century BCE entered an era of constant warfare known as the Warring States period. The period saw the rapid rise of large states (such as Chu) over smaller ones thanks to technological advancement. Though the period has usually been characterize by historians as being excessively violent compared to the Spring and Autumn period it was also punctured by several cultural and social growth through the expansion of several different sects of Confucianism and Taoism. 
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 4th century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34799" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34799" title="432">
432

Year 432 (CDXXXII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aetius and Valerius (or, less frequently, year 1185 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 432 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34800" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34800" title="1829">
1829

Year 1829 (MDCCCXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34801" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34801" title="620">
620

Year 620 (DCXX) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 620 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34802" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34802" title="621">
621

Year 621 (DCXXI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 621 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Technology.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34803" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34803" title="623">
623

Year 623 (DCXXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 623 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34804" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34804" title="509 BC">
509 BC

The year 509 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Brutus and Collatinus (or, less frequently, year 245 " Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 509 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34805" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34805" title="31 BC">
31 BC

Year 31 BC was either a common year starting on Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday or a leap year starting on Tuesday or Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Tuesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Antonius and Octavianus (or, less frequently, year 723 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 31 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Art.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34806" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34806" title="27 BC">
27 BC

Year 27 BC was either a common year starting on Sunday, Monday or Tuesday or a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Sunday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Second Consulship of Octavian and Agrippa (or, less frequently, year 727 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 27 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic/Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34807" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34807" title="23 BC">
23 BC

Year 23 BC was either a common year starting on Saturday or Sunday or a leap year starting on Friday, Saturday or Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Friday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Varro (or, less frequently, year 731 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 23 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Architecture.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34808" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34808" title="12 BC">
12 BC

Year 12 BC was either a common year starting on Saturday, Sunday or Monday or a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Friday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Quirinius (or, less frequently, year 742 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 12 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Astronomy.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34809" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34809" title="14">
14

Year 14 (XIV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pompeius and Appuleius (or, less frequently, year 767 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 14 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Art.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34810" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34810" title="19">
19

Year 19 (XIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silanus and Balbus (or, less frequently, year 772 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 19 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34811" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34811" title="37">
37

Year 37 (XXXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Proculus and Pontius (or, less frequently, year 790 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 37 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34812" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34812" title="68">
68

Year 68 (LXVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Asconius and Thraculus, or the start of the Year of the Four Emperors (or, less frequently, year 821 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 68 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. These are now used throughout the world.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34813" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34813" title="69">
69

Year 69 (LXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 822 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 69 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34814" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34814" title="43">
43

Year 43 (XLIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Vitellius (or, less frequently, year 796 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 43 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34815" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34815" title="41">
41

Year 41 (XLI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of C. Caesar Augustus Germanicus and Cn. Sentius Saturninus (or, less frequently, year 794 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 41 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34816" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34816" title="54">
54

Year 54 (LIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Marcellus (or, less frequently, year 807 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 54 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34817" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34817" title="79">
79

Year 79 (LXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Vespasianus (or, less frequently, year 832 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 79 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34818" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34818" title="81">
81

Year 81 (LXXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silva and Pollio (or, less frequently, year 834 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 81 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Commerce.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34819" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34819" title="0s">
0s

This "decade" only has 9 years. Note that there is no year zero (0) in either the proleptic Gregorian calendar or the Julian calendar. Hence, AD 1 was preceded by the year 1 BC (not 0 BC).
This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34820" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34820" title="10s">
10s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34821" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34821" title="20s">
20s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34822" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34822" title="30s">
30s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34823" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34823" title="40s">
40s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34824" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34824" title="50s">
50s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34825" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34825" title="60s">
60s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34826" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34826" title="70s">
70s


</doc>
<doc id="34827" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34827" title="80s">
80s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34828" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34828" title="90s">
90s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 
Births.
Grant Tucker
Deaths.
Teresa de Calcuta ,
Freddie Mercury

</doc>
<doc id="34829" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34829" title="100s (decade)">
100s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34830" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34830" title="200s (decade)">
200s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34831" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34831" title="300s (decade)">
300s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 
East Asia.
In Yamato (Japan), the Kofun period doinated during this decade. It was an animistic culture which existed prior the introduction of Buddhism. A legend of the 4th century Prince Yamato Takeru alludes to the borders of the Yamato and battlegrounds in the area. A frontier was obviously somewhere close to the later Izumo province (the eastern part of today's Shimane prefecture). Another frontier, in Kyūshū, was apparently somewhere north of today's Kumamoto prefecture. The legend specifically states that there was an eastern land in Honshū "whose people disobeyed the imperial court", against whom Yamato Takeru was sent to fight. That rivalling country may have been located rather close to the Yamato nucleus area itself, or relatively far away. The today Kai province is mentioned as one of the locations where prince Yamato Takeru sojourned in his said military expedition.
Northern frontier of this age was also explained in "Kojiki" as the legend of Shido Shogun's (四道将軍: Shoguns to four ways) expedition. Out of four shoguns, Ōbiko set northward to Koshi and his son Take Nunakawawake set to eastern states. The father moved east from northern Koshi while the son moved north on his way, and they finally met at Aizu (current western Fukushima). Although the legend itself is not likely to be a historical fact, Aizu is rather close to southern Tōhoku, where the north end of keyhole kofun culture as of late 4th century is located.

</doc>
<doc id="34832" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34832" title="110s">
110s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34833" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34833" title="120s">
120s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34834" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34834" title="125">
125

Year 125 (CXXV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Paullinus and Titius (or, less frequently, year 878 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 125 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34835" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34835" title="1st century BC">
1st century BC

The 1st century BC, also known as the last century BC, started on the first day of 100 BC and ended on the last day of 1 BC. The AD/BC notation does not use a year zero; however, astronomical year numbering does use a minus sign, so ""2 BC" is equal to "year -1"". This is the 100th century in the Holocene calendar; it spans the years 9,901 to 10,000. 1st century AD (Anno Domini) follows.
In the course of the century all the remaining independent lands surrounding the Mediterranean were steadily brought under Roman control, being ruled either directly under governors or through puppet kings appointed by Rome. The Roman state itself was plunged into civil war several times, finally resulting in the marginalization of its 500 year old republic, and the embodiment of total state power in a single man—the emperor. 
The internal turbulence that plagued Rome at this time can be seen as the last death throes of the Roman Republic, as it finally gave way to the autocratic ambitions of powerful men like Sulla, Julius Caesar, Mark Antony and Octavian. Octavian's ascension to total power as the emperor Augustus is considered to mark the point in history where the Roman Republic ends and the Roman Empire begins. Some scholars refer to this event as the Roman Revolution. It is believed that the birth of Jesus, the central figure of Christianity took place at the close of this century.
In the eastern mainland, the Han Dynasty began to decline and the court of China was in chaos in the latter half of this century. Trapped in a difficult situation, the Xiongnu had to begin emigration to the west or attach themselves to the Han.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 1st century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34837" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34837" title="2nd century BC">
2nd century BC

The 2nd century BC started the first day of 200 BC and ended the last day of 101 BC. It is considered part of the Classical era, although depending on the region being studied, other terms may be more proper. In the context of the Eastern Mediterranean, it is also referred to as the Hellenistic period.
Fresh from its victories in the Second Punic War, the Roman Republic continued its expansion into neighbouring territories, eventually annexing Greece, and the North African coast after completely destroying the city of Carthage at the end of the Third Punic War. Rome's influence was also felt in the near east, as crumbling Hellenistic states like the Seleucid Empire were forced to make treaties on Roman terms in order to avoid confrontation with the new masters of the western Mediterranean. The end of the century witnessed the reforming of the Roman Army from a citizen army to a voluntary professional force, under the guidance of the great general and statesman Gaius Marius—(Marian Reforms).
In South Asia, the Mauryan Empire in India empire collapsed when Brihadnatha, the last emperor, was killed by Pushyamitra Sunga, a Mauryan general and the founder of the Sunga Empire. In East Asia, China reached a high point under the Han Dynasty. The Han Empire extended its boundaries from Korea in the east to Vietnam in the South to the borders of modern day Kazakhstan in the west. Also in the 2nd century BC, the Han dispatched the explorer Zhang Qian to explore the lands to the west and to form an alliance with the Yuezhi people in order to combat the nomadic tribe of the Xiongnu.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 2nd century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34838" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34838" title="3rd century BC">
3rd century BC

The 3rd century BC started the first day of 300 BC and ended the last day of 201 BC. It is considered part of the Classical era, epoch, or historical period.
In the Mediterranean the first few decades of this century were characterized by a balance of power between the Greek Hellenistic kingdoms in the east, and the great mercantile power of Carthage in the west. This balance was shattered when conflict arose between Carthage and the Roman Republic. In the following decades, the Carthaginian Republic was first humbled and then destroyed by the Romans in the first and second Punic wars. Following the Second Punic War, Rome became the most important power in the western Mediterranean.
In India, Ashoka the Great ruled the Maurya Empire. The Pandya, Chola and Chera dynasties of the classical age flourished in the ancient Tamil country. The Xiong Nu were at the height of their power in Mongolia. The Warring States period in China drew to a close, with Qin Shihuang conquering other nation-states and establishing the short-lived Qin dynasty, the first empire of China, which was followed in the same century by the long-lasting Han dynasty. The Protohistoric Period began in the Korean peninsula.
Evidence.
Much of what is known of this century comes from the works of the Greek historian Polybius, whose main concern is the story of how Rome comes to dominate the known world.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 3rd century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34839" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34839" title="5th century BC">
5th century BC

The 5th century BC started the first day of 500 BC and ended the last day of 401 BC.
This century saw the establishment of Pataliputra as a capital of Magadha Empire. This city would later become the ruling capital of different Indian Kingdoms for about thousand years. This period saw the rise of two great philosophical schools of the East, Jainism and Buddhism. 
This period saw Mahavira and Buddha spreading their respective teachings in Northern Plains of India. This essentially changed the socio-cultural and political dynamics of the region of South Asia. Buddhism would later go on to become one of the major world religions. 
This period also saw the work of Yaska, who created Nirukta, that would lay the foundation stone for Sanskrit grammar and is one of the oldest works on grammar known to mankind. 
This century also saw the beginning of a period of philosophical brilliance among Western civilizations, particularly the Greeks, which would continue all the way through the 4th century until the time of Alexander the Great. Ancient Greek philosophy developed during the 5th century BC, setting the foundation for Western ideology. In Athens and elsewhere in the Mediterranean world, the 5th century marked a high point in the development of political institutions, art, architecture, and literature.
The century was also notable for the Persian Wars, fought between the Greek cities and the vast Persian Empire. Determined to punish Athens for supporting a revolt by conquered Greek cities in Asia Minor, King Darius I sent several armies against them, only to have his plans first thwarted by a storm and later by a defeat at the Battle of Marathon. His son Xerxes attempted to finish the job 10 years later, and succeeded in capturing Athens and burning it to the ground, only to be defeated later on land at Plataea. In the latter part of the century the Greeks became locked in a bitter war among themselves, with the major cities Athens and Sparta competing for absolute domination.
The Spartans were victorious in this battle.
Sovereign states.
See: List of sovereign states in the 5th century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34840" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34840" title="6th century BC">
6th century BC

The 6th century BCE started the first day of 600 BCE and ended the last day of 501 BCE.
This century represents the peak of a period in human history popularly known as Axial Age. This period saw the emergence of five major thought streams springing from five great thinkers in different parts of the world. Buddha and Mahavira in India, Zoroaster in Persia, Pythagoras in Greece and Confucius in China.
Pāṇini, in India, composed a grammar for Sanskrit, in this century or slightly later. This is the oldest still known grammar of any language.
In the Near East, the first half of this century was dominated by the Neo-Babylonian or Chaldean empire, which had risen to power late in the previous century after successfully rebelling against Assyrian rule. The Kingdom of Judah came to an end in 586 BCE when Babylonian forces under Nebuchadnezzar II captured Jerusalem, and removed most of its population to their own lands. Babylonian rule was toppled however in the 540s, by Cyrus, who founded the Persian Empire in its place. The Persian Empire continued to expand and grew into the greatest empire the world had known at the time. 
In Iron Age Europe, the Celtic expansion was in progress. China was in the Spring and Autumn Period.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 6th century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34841" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34841" title="400s (decade)">
400s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34843" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34843" title="1430s">
1430s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 
Births.
People

</doc>
<doc id="34844" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34844" title="1884">
1884

Year 1884 (MDCCCLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34845" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34845" title="1886">
1886

Year 1886 (MDCCCLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day offset Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34846" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34846" title="1985">
1985

1985 ()
will be .
The year 1985 was designated as the "International Youth Year" by the United Nations.

</doc>
<doc id="34847" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34847" title="1989">
1989

1989 ()
will be .
It was a historical turning point for the wave of revolutions that swept the Eastern Bloc, starting in Poland that summer with the beginning of a move towards private enterprise, coming to a head with opening of the Berlin Wall in November, embracing the overthrow of the communist dictatorship in Romania in December and ending in December 1991 with the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Collectively known as the Revolutions of 1989, they heralded the beginning of the post–Cold War period.
It was the year of the first Brazilian presidential elections in 29 years, since the end of the military government in 1985 which commanded the country for more than twenty years, and marked the redemocratization process's final point. F. W. de Klerk was elected in South Africa, and his regime gradually dismantled the apartheid system over the next five years. The Echo Boom in the United States reached its peak in 1989-1990.
The early Internet, by then 20 years old, was rapidly evolving in 1989. The first commercial Internet service providers surfaced in this year. The World Wide Web was first conceived of in Switzerland by Tim Berners-Lee and was opened to the public for free use in 1993 after several years of development at CERN. The first unofficial text message was also sent in 1989.
1989 marked the beginning of the current Heisei period in Japan.

</doc>
<doc id="34848" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34848" title="310s">
310s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34849" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34849" title="320s">
320s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34850" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34850" title="321">
321

Year 321 (CCCXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crispus and Constantinus (or, less frequently, year 1074 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 321 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34851" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34851" title="1955">
1955

1955 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34856" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34856" title="21st century BC">
21st century BC

The 21st century BC is a century which lasted from the year 2100 BC to 2001 BC.
Events.
Note: all dates from this long ago should be regarded as either approximate or conjectural; there are no absolutely certain dates, and multiple competing reconstructed chronologies, for this time period.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 21st century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34857" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34857" title="11th century BC">
11th century BC

The 11th century comprises all years from 1100 to 1001 . Although many human societies were literate in this period, some of the individuals mentioned below may be apocryphal rather than historically accurate.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 11th century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="34858" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34858" title="256 BC">
256 BC

Year 256 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Longus and Caedicius/Regulus (or, less frequently, year 498 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 256 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34859" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34859" title="220s BC">
220s BC


</doc>
<doc id="34860" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34860" title="1644">
1644

Year 1644 (MDCXLIV) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34861" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34861" title="9">
9

Year 9 (IX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sabinus and Camerinus (or, less frequently, year 762 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 9 for this year has been used since the late medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Literature.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34862" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34862" title="25">
25

Year 25 (XXV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Agrippa (or, less frequently, year 778 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 25 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34863" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34863" title="1923">
1923

1923 ()
will be .
Events.
April.
 wing academic and jurist Ernst Trygger becomes new Prime Minister.
August.
 August 21 Necaxa was founded by William H. Frasser, owner of the Light and Power Company (Compañía de Luz y Fuerza ) in the state of Puebla Mexico. 

</doc>
<doc id="34864" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34864" title="1933">
1933

1933 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34865" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34865" title="1953">
1953

1953 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34866" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34866" title="1922">
1922

1922 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34867" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34867" title="1925">
1925

1925 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34868" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34868" title="1582">
1582

Year 1582 (MDLXXXII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar, and a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Proleptic Gregorian calendar. However, this year also saw the beginning of the Gregorian Calendar switch, when the Papal bull known as "Inter gravissimas" introduced the Gregorian calendar, adopted by Spain, Portugal, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and most of present-day Italy from the start. In these countries, the year continued as normal until Thursday, October 4. However, the next day became Friday, October 15 (like a common year starting on Friday), in those countries (France followed two months later, letting Sunday, December 9 be followed by Monday, December 20). Other countries continued using the Julian calendar, switching calendars in later years, and the complete conversion of the Gregorian calendar was not entirely done until 1929.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34869" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34869" title="1752">
1752

Year 1752 (MDCCLII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Gregorian calendar, and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. In the British Empire, it was the only year with 355 days, as September 3 through September 13 were skipped when the Empire adopted the Gregorian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34870" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34870" title="1765">
1765

Year 1765 (MDCCLXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34871" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34871" title="714">
714

Year 714 (DCCXIV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 714 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34872" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34872" title="768">
768

Year 768 (DCCLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 768 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34875" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34875" title="1000s (decade)">
1000s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34876" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34876" title="1000">
1000

Year 1000 (M) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. It was also the last year of the 10th century as well as the last year of the 1st millennium of the Dionysian era ending on December 31st, but the first year of the 1000s decade.
The year falls well into the period of Old World history known as the Middle Ages; in Europe, it is sometimes and by convention considered the boundary date between the Early Middle Ages and the High Middle Ages.
The Muslim world was in its "Golden Age". 
China was in its Song period, Japan was in its "classical" Heian period.
India was divided into a number of lesser empires, such as the Rashtrakuta Dynasty, Pala Empire (Kamboja Pala dynasty; Mahipala), Chola dynasty (Raja Raja Chola I), Yadava dynasty, etc.
The New World and Sub-Saharan Africa were still in the prehistoric period (although Arab slave trade was beginning to be an important factor in the formation of the Sahelian kingdoms).
World population is estimated to have been between c. 250 and 310 million.
<onlyinclude>
Muslim world.
The Islamic World was in its Golden Age; still organised in Caliphates, it was still dominated by the Abbasid Caliphate, with the Caliphate of Córdoba to the west, and ongoing campaigns in Africa and in India.
Persia was a period of instability, with various polities seceding from Abassid rule, among whom the Ghaznavids would emerge as the most powerful.
The Islamic world was reaching the peak of its historical scientific achievements. 
Important scholars and scientists who flourished in the year 1000 include Ibn al-Haytham (Alhacen), Abu Rayhan al-Biruni, Avicenna, Abu al-Qasim (Abulcasis), Ibn Yunus (publishes his astronomical treatise "Al-Zij al-Hakimi al-Kabir" in Cairo in c. 1000), Abu Sahl al-Quhi (Kuhi), Abu-Mahmud al-Khujandi, Abu Nasr Mansur, Abu al-Wafa, Ahmad ibn Fadlan, Al-Muqaddasi, Ali Ibn Isa, and al-Karaji (al-Karkhi).
Ibn al-Haytham ("Book of Optics"), Avicenna, Abu Rayhan al-Biruni, and Abu al-Qasim ("Al-Tasrif"), who all flourished around the year 1000, are considered to be among the greatest scientists of the Middle Ages altogether.
The Turkic migration by this time had reached Eastern Europe, and most of the Turkic tribes (Khazars, Bulghars, Pechenegs etc.) had been Islamized.
Christendom.
In continental Europe, the Holy Roman Empire established itself as the most powerful state. 
Otto III made a pilgrimage from Rome to Aachen and Gniezno (Gnesen), stopping at Regensburg, Meissen, Magdeburg, and Gniezno. The Congress of Gniezno (with Bolesław I Chrobry) was part of his pilgrimage. In Rome, he built the basilica of San Bartolomeo all'Isola, to host the relics of St. Bartholomew.
In France, Robert II, the son of Hugh Capet, was the first of the Capetian kings.
The Byzantine Empire under the Macedonian dynasty was engaged in a long and hard war with the First Bulgarian Empire. In the year 1000, the Byzantine generals Theodorokanos and Nikephoros Xiphias captured the former Bulgarian capitals of Pliska and Great Preslav, along with Little Preslav, extending Byzantine control over the northeastern portion of the Bulgarian state (Mysia and Scythia Minor). At the same time, Byzantium was instrumental in the Christianization of the Kievan Rus' and of other medieval Slavic states.
In Great Britain, a unified kingdom of England had developed out of the various Anglo-Saxon kingdoms.
In Scandinavia, Christianization was in its early stages, with the Althingi of the Icelandic Commonwealth embracing Christianity in the year 1000.
On September 9, King Olaf Tryggvason was defeated by an alliance of his enemies in the Battle of Svolder.
Sweyn I established Danish control over part of Norway. Oslo, Norway, was founded (the exact year is debatable, but the 1,000 year anniversary was held in the year 2000).
The Papacy during this time was in a period of decline, in retrospect known as the saeculum obscurum ("Dark Age") or "pornocracy" ("rule of harlots"), a state of affairs that would result in the Great Schism later in the 11th century.
Hungary was established in 1000 as a Christian state. In the next centuries, the Kingdom of Hungary became the pre-eminent cultural power in the Central European region. On December 25, Stephen I was crowned as the first King of Hungary in Esztergom.
Sancho III of Navarre became King of Aragon and Navarre. The Reconquista was gaining some ground, but the southern Iberian peninsula would still be dominated by Islam for centuries to come; Córdoba at this time was the world's largest city with 450,000 inhabitants.
It is believed that in or around this year, Norse explorer Leif Ericson became the first European to land in the Americas, at L'Anse aux Meadows, probably in modern-day Newfoundland.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34877" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34877" title="1040s">
1040s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34878" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34878" title="1299">
1299

Year 1299 (MCCXCIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Markets.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34879" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34879" title="1326">
1326

Year 1326 (MCCCXXVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34880" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34880" title="1359">
1359

Year 1359 (MCCCLIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34881" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34881" title="1389">
1389

Year 1389 (MCCCLXXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34882" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34882" title="1402">
1402

Year 1402 (MCDII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34883" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34883" title="1403">
1403

Year 1403 (MCDIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34884" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34884" title="1421">
1421

Year 1421 (MCDXXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34885" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34885" title="1451">
1451

Year 1451 (MCDLI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34886" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34886" title="1481">
1481

Year 1481 (MCDLXXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar).
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34887" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34887" title="1512">
1512

Year 1512 (MDXII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34888" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34888" title="1520">
1520

Year 1520 (MDXX) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
No specific date.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34889" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34889" title="1566">
1566

Year 1566 (MDLXVI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34890" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34890" title="1595">
1595

Year 1595 (MDXCV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34891" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34891" title="1603">
1603

Year 1603 (MDCIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34892" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34892" title="1617">
1617

Year 1617 (MDCXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34893" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34893" title="1640">
1640

Year 1640 (MDCXL) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34894" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34894" title="1687">
1687

Year 1687 (MDCLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
July–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34895" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34895" title="1691">
1691

Year 1691 (MDCXCI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>
Deaths.
Notes.
This is one of the numbers, in certain fonts, that can be read upside down, and displays the same number.

</doc>
<doc id="34896" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34896" title="1695">
1695

Year 1695 (MDCXCV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar. It was also a particularly cold and wet year. Contemporary records claim that wine froze in the glasses in the Palace of Versailles.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34897" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34897" title="1703">
1703

Year 1703 (MDCCIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Thursday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34898" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34898" title="1730">
1730

Year 1730 (MDCCXXX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34899" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34899" title="1754">
1754

Year 1754 (MDCCLIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34900" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34900" title="1757">
1757

Year 1757 (MDCCLVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34901" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34901" title="1774">
1774

Year 1774 (MDCCLXXIV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
Martinez de Pasqually, French freemason (birth date unknown)

</doc>
<doc id="34902" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34902" title="1808">
1808

Year 1808 (MDCCCVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34903" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34903" title="1839">
1839

Year 1839 (MDCCCXXXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34905" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34905" title="1823">
1823

Year 1823 (MDCCCXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34906" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34906" title="1690s">
1690s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34907" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34907" title="1680s">
1680s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34908" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34908" title="1620s">
1620s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34909" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34909" title="1618">
1618

Year 1618 (MDCXVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34911" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34911" title="1930">
1930

1930 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34912" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34912" title="286">
286

Year 286 (CCLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Maximus and Aquilinus (or, less frequently, year 1039 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 286 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34914" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34914" title="1792">
1792

Year 1792 (MDCCXCII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34915" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34915" title="476">
476

Year 476 (CDLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Basiliscus and Armatus (or, less frequently, year 1229 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 476 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Because the fall of the Western Roman Empire occurred in 476, many historians consider it the last year of ancient history and the first year of the Middle Ages in Europe.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34916" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34916" title="1790">
1790

Year 1790 (MDCCXC) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
July–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34918" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34918" title="1652">
1652

Year 1652 (MDCLII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
July–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34921" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34921" title="1841">
1841

Year 1841 (MDCCCXLI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34922" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34922" title="1842">
1842

Year 1842 (MDCCCXLII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34923" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34923" title="1154">
1154

Year 1154 (MCLIV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and culture.
January 15 – Muhammad al-Idrisi completes his atlas of the world, the "Tabula Rogeriana", which will remain one of the most accurate maps until the Age of Discovery. 
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34924" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34924" title="1163">
1163

Year 1163 (MCLXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34925" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34925" title="1160s">
1160s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34927" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34927" title="1680">
1680

Year 1680 (MDCLXXX) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34928" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34928" title="1598">
1598

Year 1598 (MDXCVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34931" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34931" title="1815">
1815

Year 1815 (MDCCCXV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link displays the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34932" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34932" title="70">
70

Year 70 (LXX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Vespasianus (or, less frequently, year 823 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 70 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34934" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34934" title="1630s">
1630s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34935" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34935" title="1636">
1636

Year 1636 (MDCXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34936" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34936" title="660 BC">
660 BC


</doc>
<doc id="34937" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34937" title="1858">
1858


</doc>
<doc id="34938" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34938" title="1878">
1878

Year 1878 (MDCCCLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34939" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34939" title="1927">
1927

1927 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34940" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34940" title="385">
385

Year 385 (CCCLXXXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Bauto (or, less frequently, year 1138 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 385 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Sport in the Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34941" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34941" title="731">
731

Year 731 (DCCXXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 731 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34942" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34942" title="824">
824

Year 824 (DCCCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34943" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34943" title="1543">
1543

Year 1543 (MDXLIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. It is one of the years sometimes referred to as an "Annus mirabilis" because of its significant publications in science, considered the start of the scientific revolution.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34944" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34944" title="1531">
1531

Year 1531 (MDXXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34945" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34945" title="1720">
1720

Year 1720 (MDCCXX) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34946" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34946" title="1794">
1794

Year 1794 (MDCCXCIV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>
In fiction.
In the graphic adventure game "Day of the Tentacle", the character Hoagie is sent "200 years in the past" from 1994. He arrives in Revolutionary America during the writing of the Constitution of the United States.

</doc>
<doc id="34947" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34947" title="1810">
1810

Year 1810 (MDCCCX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34948" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34948" title="1814">
1814

Year 1814 (MDCCCXIV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34949" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34949" title="1812">
1812

Year 1812 (MDCCCXII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 12-days-behind Julian calendar.
Events.
October–December.
 [File:Grimm's Kinder- und Hausmärchen, Erster Theil (1812).cover.jpg|right|100px|alt=]

</doc>
<doc id="34950" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34950" title="1837">
1837

Year 1837 (MDCCCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34951" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34951" title="1843">
1843

Year 1843 (MDCCCXLIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34952" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34952" title="1852">
1852

Year 1852 (MDCCCLII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34953" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34953" title="1958">
1958

1958 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34954" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34954" title="1847">
1847

Year 1847 (MDCCCXLVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34955" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34955" title="1844">
1844

Year 1844 (MDCCCXLIV) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34956" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34956" title="1380">
1380

Year 1380 (MCCCLXXX) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34957" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34957" title="1465">
1465

Year 1465 (MCDLXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34958" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34958" title="1535">
1535

Year 1535 (MDXXXV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34959" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34959" title="1557">
1557

Year 1557 (MDLVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34960" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34960" title="1568">
1568

Year 1568 (MDLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34961" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34961" title="1755">
1755

Year 1755 (MDCCLV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar (or a common year starting on Sunday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar).
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34962" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34962" title="1657">
1657

Year 1657 (MDCLVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34963" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34963" title="1800">
1800

1800 (MDCCC) was an exceptional common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) in the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday in the Julian calendar. The Gregorian calendar was 11 days ahead of the Julian calendar until Friday, February 28 [O.S. February 17, 1800] 1800, but 12 days ahead from Saturday, March 1 [O.S. February 18, 1800] 1800.
 It was the last year of the 18th century.

</doc>
<doc id="34964" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34964" title="1802">
1802

Year 1802 (MDCCCII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34965" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34965" title="1813">
1813

Year 1813 (MDCCCXIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34966" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34966" title="1819">
1819

Year 1819 (MDCCCXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) in the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34967" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34967" title="1821">
1821

Year 1821 (MDCCCXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34968" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34968" title="1879">
1879

Year 1879 (MDCCCLXXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34969" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34969" title="821">
821

Year 821 (DCCCXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34970" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34970" title="867">
867

Year 867 (DCCCLXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34971" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34971" title="1503">
1503

Year 1503 (MDIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34972" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34972" title="1554">
1554

Year 1554 (MDLIV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34973" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34973" title="1622">
1622

Year 1622 (MDCXXII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34974" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34974" title="1650">
1650

Year 1650 (MDCL) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34975" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34975" title="1141">
1141

Year 1141 (MCXLI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34976" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34976" title="1685">
1685

Year 1685 (MDCLXXXV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34977" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34977" title="1762">
1762

Year 1762 (MDCCLXII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34978" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34978" title="1806">
1806

Year 1806 (MDCCCVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="34980" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34980" title="1935">
1935

1935 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34981" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34981" title="1934">
1934

1934 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34982" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34982" title="1954">
1954

1954 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="34983" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34983" title="1850">
1850

Year 1850 (MDCCCL) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar.
Births.
January–March.
mpm

</doc>
<doc id="34985" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34985" title="1135">
1135

Year 1135 (MCXXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34986" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34986" title="1204">
1204

Year 1204 (MCCIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34987" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34987" title="481 BC">
481 BC

Year 481 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vibulanus and Fusus (or, less frequently, year 273 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 481 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34988" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34988" title="73 BC">
73 BC

Year 73 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lucullus and Longinus (or, less frequently, year 681 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 73 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
India.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34989" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34989" title="71 BC">
71 BC

Year 71 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Orestes (or, less frequently, year 683 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 71 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34990" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34990" title="1632">
1632

Year 1632 (MDCXXXII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34991" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34991" title="1594">
1594

Year 1594 (MDXCIV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34992" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34992" title="1611">
1611

Year 1611 (MDCXI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34993" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34993" title="1469">
1469

Year 1469 (MCDLXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34994" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34994" title="1520s">
1520s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34995" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34995" title="1522">
1522

Year 1522 (MDXXII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34996" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34996" title="1460s">
1460s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="34997" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34997" title="499 BC">
499 BC

Year 499 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aebutius and Cicurinus (or, less frequently, year 255 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 499 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Greece.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34998" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34998" title="479 BC">
479 BC

Year 479 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vibulanus and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 275 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 479 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="34999" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34999" title="431 BC">
431 BC

Year 431 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cincinnatus and Mento (or, less frequently, year 323 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 431 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Literature.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35000" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35000" title="404 BC">
404 BC

Year 404 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Volusus, Cossus, Fidenas, Ambustus, Maluginensis and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 350 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 404 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Persian Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35001" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35001" title="334 BC">
334 BC

Year 334 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caudinus and Calvinus (or, less frequently, year 420 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 334 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35002" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35002" title="323 BC">
323 BC

Year 323 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Longus and Cerretanus (or, less frequently, year 431 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 323 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Greece.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35003" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35003" title="264 BC">
264 BC

Year 264 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caudex and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 490 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 264 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35004" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35004" title="241 BC">
241 BC

Year 241 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Atticus and Cerco (or, less frequently, year 513 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 241 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35005" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35005" title="218 BC">
218 BC

Year 218 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scipio and Longus (or, less frequently, year 536 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 218 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Seleucid Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35006" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35006" title="202 BC">
202 BC

Year 202 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Geminus and Nero (or, less frequently, year 552 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 202 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35007" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35007" title="149 BC">
149 BC

Year 149 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Censorinus and Manilius (or, less frequently, year 605 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 149 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Bithynia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35008" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35008" title="146 BC">
146 BC

Year 146 BCE was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Achaicus (or, less frequently, year 608 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 146 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Astronomy.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35009" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35009" title="48 BC">
48 BC

Year 48 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Vatia (or, less frequently, year 706 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 48 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35010" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35010" title="31">
31

Year 31 (XXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Seianus (or, less frequently, year 784 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 31 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35011" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35011" title="30s BC">
30s BC


</doc>
<doc id="35012" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35012" title="500s BC (decade)">
500s BC (decade)


</doc>
<doc id="35013" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35013" title="7th century BC">
7th century BC

The 7th century BC began the first day of 700 BC and ended the last day of 601 BC.
The Assyrian Empire continued to dominate the Near East during this century, exercising formidable power over neighbors like Babylon and Egypt. In the last two decades of the century, however, the empire began to unravel as numerous enemies made alliances and waged war from all sides. The Assyrians finally left the world stage permanently when their capital Nineveh was destroyed in 612 BC. These events gave rise to the Neo-Babylonian Empire, which would dominate the region for much of the following century.
Sovereign States.
See: List of sovereign states in the 7th century BC.

</doc>
<doc id="35014" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35014" title="1851">
1851

1851 (MDCCCLI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar).

</doc>
<doc id="35015" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35015" title="1853">
1853

Year 1853 (MDCCCLIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35016" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35016" title="1600s (decade)">
1600s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35017" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35017" title="1600">
1600

Year 1600 (MDC) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) and a century leap year of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar. It was the last century leap year until the year 2000.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35018" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35018" title="1827">
1827

The year 1827 (MDCCCXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35019" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35019" title="1500">
1500

Year 1500 (MD) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
The year was seen as being especially important by many Christians in Europe, who thought it would bring the beginning of the end of the world. Their belief was based on the phrase "half-time after the time", when the apocalypse was due to occur, which appears in the Book of Revelation and was seen as referring to 1500.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35020" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35020" title="1822">
1822

Year 1822 (MDCCCXXII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day-slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35021" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35021" title="1831">
1831

Year 1831 (MDCCCXXXI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.
Deaths.
Date unknown.
Marengo, Napoleon's mount in several battles (b. 1793)

</doc>
<doc id="35022" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35022" title="5.56×45mm NATO">
5.56×45mm NATO

The 5.56×45mm NATO (official NATO nomenclature 5.56 NATO) is an intermediate cartridge developed in the United States and originally chambered in the M16 rifle. Under STANAG 4172, it is a standard cartridge for NATO forces as well as many non-NATO countries. It is derived from, but not identical to, the .223 Remington cartridge.
History.
In the 1950s, the 7.62×51mm NATO rifle cartridge (sold commercially as the .308 Winchester rifle cartridge) was selected to replace the .30-06 Springfield as the standard NATO rifle cartridge. At the time of selection, there had been criticism that the 7.62×51mm NATO was too powerful for light weight modern service rifles, causing excessive recoil, and that the ammunition did not allow for sufficient rate of fire in modern combat.
The British had extensive evidence with their own experiments into an intermediate cartridge since 1945 and were on the point of introducing a .280 inch (7 mm) cartridge when the selection of the 7.62×51mm NATO was made. The FN company had also been involved. The concerns about recoil and effectiveness were effectively overruled by the US within NATO, and the other NATO nations accepted that standardization was more important at the time than selection of the ideal cartridge. However, while the 7.62×51mm NATO round became NATO standard, the US was already engaged in research of their own, which ultimately led to the 5.56×45mm NATO cartridge.
During the late 1950s, ArmaLite and other U.S. firearm designers started their individual Small Caliber/High Velocity (SCHV) assault rifle experiments using the commercial .222 Remington cartridge. When it became clear that there was not enough powder capacity to meet U.S. Continental Army Command's (CONARC) velocity and penetration requirements, ArmaLite contacted Remington to create a similar cartridge with a longer case body and shorter neck. This became the .222 Remington Special. At the same time, Springfield Armory's Earle Harvey had Remington create an even longer cartridge case then known as the .224 Springfield. Springfield was forced to drop out of the CONARC competition, and thus the .224 Springfield was later released as a commercial sporting cartridge known as the .222 Remington Magnum. To prevent confusion among all of the competing .222 cartridge designations, the .222 Remington Special was renamed the .223 Remington. With the U.S. military adoption of the ArmaLite M16 rifle in 1963, the .223 Remington was standardized as the 5.56×45mm NATO. As a commercial sporting cartridge the .223 Remington was introduced in 1964.
The 5.56×45mm cartridge, along with the M16 rifle, were initially adopted by U.S. infantry forces as interim solutions to address the weight and control issues experienced with the 7.62×51mm round and M14 rifle. In the late 1950s, the Special Purpose Individual Weapon program sought to create flechette rounds to allow troops to fire sabot-type projectiles to give a short flight time and flat trajectory with a muzzle velocity of 1,200 m/s to 1,500 m/s. At those speeds, factors like range, wind drift, and target movement would no longer affect performance. Several manufacturers produced varying weapons designs, including traditional wooden, bullpup, "space age," and even multi-barrel designs with drum magazines. All used similar ammunition firing a 1.8 mm diameter dart with a plastic "puller" sabot filling the case mouth. While the flechette ammo had excellent armor penetration, there were doubts about their terminal effectiveness against unprotected targets. Conventional cased ammunition was more accurate and the sabots were expensive to produce. The SPIW never created a weapons system that was combat effective, so the M16 was retained, and the 5.56 mm round was kept as the standard U.S. infantry rifle cartridge.
In a series of mock-combat situations testing in the early 1960s with the M16, M14 and AK-47, the Army found that the M16's small size and light weight allowed it to be brought to bear much more quickly. Their final conclusion was that an 8-man team equipped with the M16 would have the same fire-power as a current 11-man team armed with the M14. U.S. troops were able to carry more than twice as much 5.56×45mm NATO ammunition as 7.62×51mm NATO for the same weight, which would allow them a better advantage ("battle rattle") against a typical NVA unit armed with AK-47, AKM or Type 56 assault rifles.
In 1977, NATO members signed an agreement to select a second, smaller caliber cartridge to replace the 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge. Of the cartridges tendered, the 5.56×45mm NATO was successful, but not the 55 gr M193 round used by the U.S. at that time. The wounds produced by the M193 round were so devastating that many consider it to be inhumane. Instead, the Belgian 62 gr SS109 round was chosen for standardization. The SS109 used a heavier bullet with a steel tip and had a lower muzzle velocity for better long-range performance, specifically to meet a requirement that the bullet be able to penetrate through one side of a steel helmet at 600 meters. This requirement made the SS109 (M855) round less capable of fragmentation than the M193 and was considered more humane.
The 5.56×45mm NATO inspired an international tendency towards relatively small sized, light weight, high velocity military service cartridges that produce relatively low bolt thrust and free recoil impulse, favoring light weight arms design and automatic fire accuracy. Similar intermediate cartridges were developed and introduced by the Soviet Union in 1974 (5.45×39mm) and by the People's Republic of China in 1987 (5.8×42mm).
Cartridge dimensions.
The 5.56×45mm NATO has 1.85 ml (28.5 grains H2O) cartridge case capacity.
5.56×45mm NATO maximum NATO cartridge dimensions. All sizes in millimeters (mm).
Americans would define the shoulder angle at alpha/2 = 23 degrees. The common rifling twist rate for this cartridge is 178 mm (1 in 7 in) or 229 mm (1 in 9 in), 6 grooves, Ø lands = 5.56 mm, Ø grooves = 5.69 mm, land width = 1.88 mm and the primer type is small rifle.
According to the official NATO proofing guidelines the 5.56×45mm NATO case can handle up to 430 MPa piezo service pressure. In NATO regulated organizations every rifle cartridge combo has to be proofed at 125% of this maximum pressure to certify for service issue. This is equal to the C.I.P. maximum pressure guideline for the .223 Remington cartridge, which is the 5.56×45mm NATO parent cartridge.
Performance.
The 5.56×45mm NATO SS109/M855 cartridge (NATO: SS109; U.S.: M855) with standard 62 gr. lead core bullets with steel penetrator will penetrate approximately 38 to into soft tissue in ideal circumstances. As with all spitzer shaped projectiles it is prone to yaw in soft tissue. However, at impact velocities above roughly 762 m/s, it may yaw and then fragment at the cannelure (the crimping groove around the cylinder of the bullet). These fragments can disperse through flesh and bone, inflicting additional internal injuries.
Fragmentation, if and when it occurs, imparts much greater damage to human tissue than bullet dimensions and velocities would suggest. This fragmentation effect is highly dependent on velocity, and therefore barrel length: short-barreled carbines generate less muzzle velocity and therefore lose wounding effectiveness at much shorter ranges than longer-barreled rifles. Proponents of the hydrostatic shock theory contend that the rapid transfer of energy also results in wounding effects beyond the tissue directly crushed and torn by the bullet and fragments. These remote wounding effects are known as hydrostatic shock.
SS109/M855 NATO ball can penetrate up to 3 mm of steel at 600 meters. According to Nammo, a Norwegian ammunition producer, the 5.56×45mm NATO M995 armour piercing cartridge can penetrate up to 12 mm of RHA steel at 100 meters.
The US Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory measured a ballistic coefficient (G7 BC) of 0.151 and form factor (G7 "i") of 1.172 for the SS109/M855 ball projectile.
The Swedish military has measured the bullet velocities of SS109/M855 military cartridges at 4 m from the muzzle fired from differing barrel lengths:
Criticism.
There has been much debate of the allegedly poor performance of the bullet on target, especially the first-shot kill rate when the muzzle velocity of the firearms used and the downrange bullet deceleration do not achieve the minimally required terminal velocity of over 750 m/s at the target to cause fragmentation. Many complaints were reported during the Gulf War, Somalia, and in the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. This can be attributed to the change in barrel length, as this cartridge was designed to achieve maximum performance in a 20 in barrel. The 14.5 in barrel of the U.S. military's M4 carbine generates considerably less muzzle velocity than the longer 20 in barrel found on the M16 rifle, and terminal performance can be a particular problem with the M4.
The 5.56×45mm NATO standard SS109/M855 cartridge was designed for maximum performance when fired from a 508 mm long barrel, as was the original 5.56 mm M193 cartridge. Experiments with longer length barrels up to 610 mm resulted in no improvement or a decrease in muzzle velocities for the SS109/M855 cartridge. Shorter barrels produce a greater flash and noise signature, and the addition of a suppressor to a short barreled AR family rifle can make it unreliable, as the reduced time for the propellant to burn in the barrel and higher muzzle pressure levels at the suppressor entrance can cause faster cycling and feeding issues. Unless the gas port can be regulated or adjusted for higher pressures, suppressors for short barreled 5.56×45mm NATO firearms must be larger and heavier than models for standard length rifles to function reliably. SS109/M855 cartridges fired from barrels under about 254 mm in length do not have enough muzzle velocity energy to cause bullet fragmentation that occurs only at terminal velocities of over 750 m/s on impact, reducing the wounding capacity.
Combat operations the past few months have again highlighted terminal performance deficiencies with 5.56×45mm 62 gr. M855 FMJ. These problems have primarily been manifested as inadequate incapacitation of enemy forces despite them being hit multiple times by M855 bullets. These failures appear to be associated with the bullets exiting the body of the enemy soldier without yawing and fragmenting.
This failure to yaw and fragment can be caused by reduced impact velocities as when fired from short barrel weapons or when the range increases.
Although all SS109/M855 types must be 62 gr. FMJ bullets constructed with a steel penetrator in the nose, the composition, thickness, and relative weights of the jackets, penetrators, and cores are quite variable, as are the types and position of the cannelures. Because of the significant differences in construction between bullets within the SS109/M855 category, terminal performance is quite variable – with differences noted in yaw, fragmentation, and penetration depths. Luke Haag's papers in the AFTE Journal (33(1):11–28, Winter 2001) also describes this problem.—
If 5.56 mm bullets fail to upset (yaw, fragment, or deform) within tissue, the results are relatively insignificant wounds. This is true for all 5.56×45mm bullets, including both military FMJ and OTM (open tip match) and civilian JHP/JSP designs used in law enforcement. As expected, with decreased wounding effects, rapid incapacitation is unlikely: enemy soldiers may continue to pose a threat to friendly forces and violent suspects can remain a danger to law enforcement personnel and the public.
This failure of 5.56×45mm NATO bullets to yaw and fragment can be caused by reduced impact velocities as when fired from short-barreled weapons or when the range to the target increases. Failure to yaw and fragment can also occur when the bullets pass through only minimal tissue, such as a limb or the chest of a thin, small statured individual, as the bullet may exit the body before it has a chance to yaw and fragment. Two other yaw issues: Angle-of-Attack (AOA) variations between different projectiles, even within the same lot of ammo, as well as Fleet Yaw variations between different rifles, were elucidated in 2006 by the Joint Service Wound Ballistic Integrated Product Team (JSWB-IPT), which included experts from the military law enforcement user community, trauma surgeons, aero ballisticians, weapon and munitions engineers, and other scientific specialists. These yaw issues were most noticeable at close ranges and were more prevalent with certain calibers and bullet styles—the most susceptible being 5.56x45mm NATO FMJ ammunition like SS109/M855 and M193.—Dr. Martin Fackler
Despite complaints that the 5.56×45mm NATO round lacks stopping power, others contend that animal studies of the wounding effects of the 5.56×45mm NATO round versus the 7.62×39mm have found that the 5.56x45mm NATO round is more damaging, due to the post-impact behavior of the 5.56 mm projectile resulting in greater cavitation of soft tissues. The US Army contended in 2003 that the lack of close range lethality of the 5.56×45mm NATO was more a matter of perception than fact. With controlled pairs and good shot placement to the head and chest, the target was usually defeated without issue. The majority of failures were the result of hitting the target in non-vital areas such as extremities. However, a minority of failures occurred in spite of multiple hits to the chest.
Some have contended that shot placement is the most important parameter in determining the lethality of a bullet. Difficulty with the 5.56×45mm NATO at range has been attributed to training, as few nations other than the US teach shooting beyond 200–300 meters to regular soldiers; Swedish ISAF units relied on .50 BMG heavy machine guns for long-range shooting due to resilience to factors such as range and wind drift. Underperformance is thus attributed to errors in range and wind estimation, target lead, firing position, and stress under fire, factors that can be resolved through training.
Improvements.
Advances have been made in 5.56 mm ammunition. The U.S. military had adopted for limited issue a 77-grain (5.0 g) "Match" bullet, type classified as the Mk 262. The heavy, lightly constructed bullet fragments more violently at short range and also has a longer fragmentation range. Originally designed for use in the Mk 12 SPR, the ammunition has found favor with special forces units who were seeking a more effective cartridge to fire from their M4A1 carbines. Commercially available loadings using these heavier (and longer) bullets can be prohibitively expensive and cost much more than military surplus ammunition. Additionally, these heavy-for-caliber loadings sacrifice some penetrative ability compared to the M855 round (which has a steel penetrator tip). Performance of 5.56×45 mm military ammunition can generally be categorized as almost entirely dependent upon velocity in order to wound effectively. Heavy OTM bullets enhance soft tissue wounding ability at the expense of hard-target/barrier penetration.
U.S. Special Forces had sought to create a round that had increased power out of carbine M4 barrels and compact SCAR-L barrels, while increasing hard target performance. Developmental efforts led to the creation of the Mk318. The bullet uses an open-tip design to inflict damage on soft tissue, and has a brass rear to penetrate hard targets. The tip and lead core fragments consistently even when using short barrels, while the rear moves through once the front impacts. It has more consistent performance because it is not yaw-dependent like the M855; the nose fragments upon impact and solid rear penetrator continues to move relatively straight. This makes the Mk318 effective against personnel with or without body armor. The round also increases accuracy, from 3–5 minute of angle (MOA) with the M855 from an M4A1 barrel to 1.71 MOA at 300 yards and 1.67 MOA at 600 yards from a 14 in SCAR-L barrel.
For general issue, the U.S. Army adopted the M855A1 round in 2010 to replace the M855. The primary reason was pressure to use non-lead bullets. The lead slug is replaced by a copper alloy slug in a reverse-drawn jacket, with a hardened steel penetrator extending beyond the jacket, reducing lead contamination to the environment. The M855A1 offers several improvements other than being lead-free. It is slightly more accurate, has better consistency of effect in regards to wounding ability, and has an increased penetrating capability. The round can better penetrate steel, brick, concrete, and masonry walls, as well as body armor and sheet metal. It penetrates 3/8 in of mild steel at 350 meters, which the M855 can only do at 160 meters. The propellant burns faster, which decreases the muzzle flash and gives a higher muzzle velocity, an important feature when fired from a short barreled M4 carbine. Though the M855A1 is more expensive to produce, its performance is considered to compensate. One possible danger is that it generates much greater pressure in the chamber when fired, decreasing service life of parts, and increasing the risk of catastrophic failure of the weapon, though this has yet to occur.
The U.S. Marines adopted the Mk318 in early 2010 due to delays with the M855A1. This was a temporary measure until the M855A1 was available for them, which occurred in mid-2010 when the Army began to receive the rounds. Both the Mk318 and M855A1 weigh the same and have similar performance, and both have better performance than the M855 against all targets. SOCOM spent less money developing the Mk318 and it is marginally better than the M855A1 in some situations, but costs more per round. The Army spent more developing the M855A1 which performs as well or nearly as well as the Mk318, but is cheaper per round and has the advantage of being lead-free. While SOCOM constantly looks for better equipment, the Army and Marines have far more troops to supply and buy more ammunition than SOCOM.
Alternatives.
If the 5.56 mm bullet is moving too slowly to reliably fragment on impact, the wound size and potential to incapacitate a person is greatly reduced. There have been numerous attempts to create an intermediate cartridge that addresses the complaints of 5.56 NATO's lack of stopping power along with lack of controllability seen in rifles firing 7.62 NATO in full auto. Some alternative cartridges like the .270 caliber 6.8mm Remington SPC (6.8×43mm) focused on superior short-range performance by sacrificing long-distance performance due to the relatively short engagement distances typically observed in urban warfare. Others, like the 6.5mm Grendel (6.5×39mm), are attempts at engineering an all purpose cartridge that could replace both the 5.56 and 7.62 NATO rounds. The 300 AAC Blackout (7.62×35mm) round was designed to have the power of the 7.62×39mm for use in an M4 platform using standard M4 magazines, and to easily interchange between subsonic ammunition for suppressed firing and supersonic rounds. All these cartridges have certain advantages over the 5.56×45mm NATO, but they have their own individual tradeoffs to include lower muzzle velocity, less range, decreased magazine capacity, and different internal parts. None of these cartridges have gained any significant traction beyond sport shooting communities.
By late 2004, the 6.8mm Remington SPC was in limited use with U.S. Special Operators. However, it was not adopted for widespread use due to resistance from officials on changing calibers, and the development of the 6.5mm Grendel which had better accuracy past 500 meters. In 2007, both the U.S. SOCOM and the U.S. Marine Corps decided not to field weapons chambered in 6.8×43mm due to logistical and cost issues.
5.56 mm NATO versus .223 Remington.
The 5.56 mm NATO and .223 Remington cartridges and chamberings are similar but not identical. While the cartridges are identical other than powder load, the chamber leade, i.e. the area where the rifling begins, is cut to a sharper angle on some .223 commercial chambers. Because of this, a cartridge loaded to generate 5.56mm pressures in a 5.56mm chamber may develop pressures that exceed SAAMI limits when fired from a short-leade .223 Remington chamber.
Brass case.
The dimensional specifications of 5.56 NATO and .223 commercial brass cases are identical. The cases tend to have similar case capacity when measured, with variations chiefly due to brand, not 5.56 vs .223 designation. The result of this is that there is no such thing as "5.56 brass" or ".223 brass", the differences in the cartridges lie in pressure ratings and in chamber leade length, not in the shape or thickness of the brass.
In July 2012, the Army solicited a request for vendors to supply alternative cartridge cases to reduce the weight of an M855A1 5.56 mm round by at least 10 percent, as well as for the 7.62 NATO and .50 BMG rounds. The cartridge cases must maintain all performance requirements when fully assembled, be able to be used by the Lake City Army Ammunition Plant, must be manufactured in quantities totaling approximately 45 million per year. Polymer-cased ammunition is expected as a likely lightweight case technology. A hybrid polymer/metal version of a conventional cartridge case would be thicker than regular cases and reduce the amount of space for the propellant, although certain polymers could be thermodynamically more efficient and not lose energy to the case or chamber when fired.
Pressure.
C.I.P. defines the maximum service and proof test pressures of the .223 Remington cartridge equal to the 5.56 mm NATO, at 430 MPa. This differs from the SAAMI maximum pressure specification for .223 Remington of 380 MPa, due to CIP test protocols measuring pressure using a drilled case, rather than an intact case with a conformal piston, along with other differences. NATO uses NATO EPVAT pressure test protocols for their small arms ammunition specifications.
Because of these differences in methodology, the CIP pressure of 430 MPa is the same as a SAAMI pressure of 380 MPa, which is reflected in US Military specifications for 5.56 mm NATO, which call for a mean maximum pressure of 55,000 PSI (when measured using a protocol similar to SAAMI).
These pressures are generated and measured using a chamber cut to 5.56  NATO specifications, including the longer leade. Firing 5.56mm NATO from a chamber with a shorter .223 Remington leade can generate pressures in excess of SAAMI maximums.
Chamber.
The 5.56 mm NATO chambering, known as a NATO or mil-spec chamber, has a longer leade, which is the distance between the mouth of the cartridge and the point at which the rifling engages the bullet. The .223 Remington chambering, known as SAAMI chamber, is allowed to have a shorter leade, and is only required to be proof tested to the lower SAAMI chamber pressure. To address these issues, various proprietary chambers exist, such as the Wylde chamber (Rock River Arms) or the ArmaLite chamber, which are designed to handle both 5.56×45mm NATO and .223 Remington equally well. The dimensions and leade of the .223 Remington minimum C.I.P. chamber also differ from the 5.56 mm NATO chamber specification.
Using commercial .223 Remington cartridges in a 5.56 mm NATO chambered rifle should work reliably, but until recently, it was believed this was less accurate than when fired from a .223 Remington chambered gun due to the longer leade. Although that may have been true in the early 1960s when the two rounds were developed, recent testing has shown that with today's ammunition, rifles chambered in 5.56mm can also fire .223 ammunition every bit as accurately as rifles chambered in .223 Remington, and the 5.56mm chamber has the additional advantage of being able to safely fire both calibers. Using 5.56 mm NATO mil-spec cartridges (such as the M855) in a .223 Remington chambered rifle can lead to excessive wear and stress on the rifle and even be unsafe, and SAAMI recommends against the practice. Some commercial rifles marked as ".223 Remington" are in fact suited for 5.56 mm NATO, such as many commercial AR-15 variants and the Ruger Mini-14 (marked ".223 cal", except the Mini-14 "Target" model, which only fires .223), but the manufacturer should always be consulted to verify that this is acceptable before attempting it, and signs of excessive pressure (such as flattening or gas staining of the primers) should be looked for in the initial testing with 5.56 mm NATO ammunition.
It should also be noted that the upper receiver (to which the barrel with its chamber are attached) and the lower receiver are entirely separate parts in AR-15 style rifles. If the lower receiver has either .223 or 5.56 stamped on it, it does not guarantee the upper assembly is rated for the same caliber, because the upper and the lower receiver in the same rifle can, and frequently do, come from different manufacturers – particularly with rifles sold to civilians or second-hand rifles.
In more practical terms, as of 2010[ [update]] most AR-15 parts suppliers engineer their complete upper assemblies (not to be confused with stripped uppers where the barrel is not included) to support both calibers in order to satisfy market demand and prevent any potential problems.
5.56 mm NATO versus 7.62 mm NATO.
Benefits of the 5.56 NATO claimed over the 7.62 NATO include equal lethality, half the mass and volume, reduced recoil and signature, better penetration of metal plates, flatter trajectory and shorter time of flight out to 700 meters, weapons chambered for it are lighter, and better hit probability. Hit probability refers to the ability of a soldier to concentrate on firing in spite of their weapon's recoil and noise, which is noticeably different between the two cartridges. The 7.62 NATO has twice the impact energy of the 5.56 NATO which is needed if a target is protected by armor, but if not both rounds normally penetrate through enemies past 600 meters. A 5.56 NATO round fired from a 20 in barrel has a flatter trajectory than a 7.62 NATO round fired from a barrel of equal length, while the 5.56 NATO fired from a 14.5 in barrel has the same trajectory as the 7.62 NATO from a 20 in barrel, as well as the same time of flight. A 7.62 NATO round reaches 50 percent of its velocity within 80 mm of the barrel when fired, so decreasing the barrel length for close quarters combat results in increased muzzle pressure and greater noise and muzzle flash.
Military cartridge types.
SS109/M855.
In 1970, NATO decided to standardize a second rifle caliber. Tests were conducted from 1977 to 1980 using U.S. XM177 5.56 mm, Belgian SS109 5.56 mm, British 4.85x49mm, and German 4.7x33mm caseless. No weapon could be agreed upon, as many were prototypes, but the SS109 was found to be the best round and standardized on October 28, 1980. The SS109 was developed in the 1970s for the FN FNC rifle and the FN Minimi machine gun. To increase the range of the Minimi, the round was created to penetrate 3.5 mm of steel at 600 meters. The SS109 had a steel tip and lead rear and was not required to penetrate body armor. Barrels required at least a 1:9 in rifle twist, but needed a 1:7 in rifle twist to fire tracer ammunition. The U.S. designated the SS109 cartridge the M855 and first used it in the M16A2 rifle. The 62-grain round was heavier than the previous 55-grain M193. While the M855 had better armor penetrating ability, it is less likely to fragment after hitting a soft target. This lessens kinetic energy transfer to the target and reduces wounding capability. The M855 is yaw dependent, meaning it depends on the angle upon which it hits the target. If at a good angle, the round turns as it enters soft tissue, breaking apart and transferring its energy to what it hits. If impacting at a bad angle, it could pass through and fail to transfer its full energy. The SS109 was made to pierce steel helmets at long range from the Minimi, not improve terminal performance on soft tissue from rifles or carbines. In Iraq, troops that engaged insurgents at less than 150 yards found that M855 rounds did not provide enough stopping power. In addition to not causing lethal effects with two or more rounds, they did not effectively penetrate vehicle windshields, even with many rounds fired at extremely close range. In Afghanistan, troops found that M855 rounds also suffered at long ranges. Although 5.56 mm rifles have an effective range of 450–600 meters, the M855 bullet's performance falls off sharply beyond 300 meters. The ranges are even shorter for short-barreled carbines. Half of small-arms attacks were launched from 300–900 meter ranges. An M855 fired from an M4 Carbine has severely degraded performance beyond 150 meters.
The maximum effective point target range of an M4 carbine with M855 rounds is 500 meters, with a maximum effective area target range of 600 meters. These mark the greatest distances the rounds can be expected to accurately hit the target, not the ranges that they have terminal effectiveness against them. Because the M855 is yaw dependent it requires instability in flight to deform upon hitting the target. It is the most stable in flight between 150–350 meters, potentially lessening its effectiveness if it strikes an enemy between those distances. In addition to this, tests have shown that 5.56 mm bullets fragment most reliably when traveling faster than 2,500 ft/s. From full-length 20 in rifle and machine gun barrels, rounds are kept above this velocity out to 200 meters. An M855 from an M4 has a muzzle velocity of 2,970 ft/s, but that is reduced to 2,522 ft/s by 150 meters. Even if it impacts at optimum speeds, 70 percent of 5.56 mm bullets will not begin to yaw until 4.7 in of tissue penetration. 15 percent more begin to yaw after that distance, so up to 85 percent of rounds that hit do not start to fragment until nearly 5 in of penetration. Against small statured or thin combatants, the M855 has little chance of yawing before passing through cleanly and leaving a wound cavity no bigger than the bullet itself. The factors of impact angle and velocity, instability distance, and penetration before yaw reduce the round's predictable effectiveness considerably in combat situations.
M855A1.
Development.
In mid-2005, a meeting was held at the Lake City Army Ammunition Plant as part of Phase II of the U.S. Army's Green Ammunition replacement program and attended by representatives from several military sectors and contractors. The objective was to create an environmentally-friendly small arms training round after the Army had been required, in part by stronger state regulations, to remove lead from their bullets to reduce lead accumulation at stateside training ranges. Initially, Phase I efforts created the M855 "green tip" 5.56 mm round that replaced the lead core with one made of tungsten, but it was found that the round would become unstable in flight and fly sideways through a target; furthermore, research was suggesting that tungsten was not environmentally better than lead. Phase II efforts focused on creating an alternative round that did not contain either metal. As the Iraq War was happening at the same time, participants decided to use the opportunity to redirect their efforts from just making a "green" training round to creating an entirely new general-purpose rifle round to address complaints encountered in the field.
Complaints had surfaced about the poor lethality of standard M855 rounds against soft targets, although while some units claimed they had virtually no effect others said they were having no problems. The problem was "yaw sensitivity," where rounds experiencing swing in flight have varying effects when they hit a target based on the degree of yaw, resulting in unpredictable lethality effects. The makeup and design of the bullet affected accuracy. The copper jacket is formed first at the point, then a steel penetrator is inserted into the jacket and the projectile is crimped shut. Error in the penetrator placement can change flight performance and affect dispersion, and the rearward-drawn jacket can create an uneven boat tail leading to uneven airflow and more affected dispersion. It also was not optimized for use in short-barreled rifles. The M855 was originally made to burn and accelerate from the 20 in barrel of the M249 SAW; then it was repurposed to the M16A2 for ammunition compatibility. When fired from a short-barreled M4, lower muzzle velocity led to decreased terminal effectiveness, and unburned propellant fired from the end of the barrel created a brighter muzzle flash and caused more combustion debris to be pushed back in the gas tube, dirtying the weapon.
Alternative 5.56 mm rounds in use were considered, like the Mk 262 open-tipped match cartridge. The Mk 262 was more accurate and had better soft target performance, and both Army and Marine units were using large quantities in Iraq deployments for designated marksman rifles. However, the Mk 262 was not adequate as a general-purpose round and cost four times more than the M855, so it could not be produced at the volumes required for 5.56 mm ammunition (up to 1 billion rounds annually). It was also found that performance suffered when fired from standard barrels, so match grade barrels would be needed for optimum performance. The M995 armor-piercing round had high accuracy and target penetration, but was eight times more expensive than the M855. Commercial alternatives were found to have the same yaw sensitivity issues as the M855.
A number of objectives were desired for the new round, including more lethal, or at least more consistent, soft target effects and less shot dispersion. It must not be specialized for any one task to have general-purpose performance, and if improvement in any one area resulted that would be considered a secondary benefit. As the services were purchasing large numbers of optics, it could not require a different reticle pattern, but re-zeroing sights would be acceptable. Optimization for short-barreled rifles was needed, as the Army and Special Forces' main weapon was the M4 carbine; a flash-suppressed propellant was also required. Optimizing the round to perform within the pressure limits for short barrels would cause performance loss in longer barrels (causing complaints from the Marine Corps), but analysis showed that a short barrel-optimized round would have less performance loss fired from a long barrel than vice versa. The round also had to be cost-competitive and meet environmental standards.
The initial M855A1 design began testing in late-2007. Its alloy core had no toxic metals and could be cheaply produced. Materials and production methods, like a reverse-drawn jacket for a clean boat tail, led to yaw insensitivity, improved soft target performance, and consistent dispersion. The steel penetrator was retained and, through greater velocity and better composition and placement, substantially improved hard target performance. It met short-barrel optimization, ballistic similarity, and producibility requirements; it cost slightly more than the M855, but far less than the Mk 262. Production prove-out testing would take time, as over a million rounds had to be test-fired to ensure instances of failure would not occur at the 1 billion rounds per year scale. As information began to be made public, the original program objective to create a "green round" led to confusion and criticism that the Army was focusing more on environmental safety than on performance. Just as testing was being completed and the first production lots were being prepared in 2009, the rounds were found to fail at high temperatures. This caused a one-year delay to replace the bullet core, which solved the temperature problem and also improved cost and producibility.
In December 2014, small ammunition company Liberty Ammunition won a $15.6 million lawsuit against the Army for passing on proprietary data and specifications for its lead-free copper-core, steel-tipped bullet design to other vendors. The company founder presented his idea for an enhanced performance incapacitative composite (EPIC) 5.56 mm round to Army officials and gave technical and performance data to SOCOM in 2005, during Phase II of the green ammunition program, after a non-disclosure agreement was signed protecting proprietary information. Liberty Ammunition was formed to produce the EPIC round and received a SOCOM contract to test it, completed in 2007. The round's design patent was approved in 2010, the same year the M855A1 was fielded. A suit was filed claiming the Army shared confidential information to potential vendors, and the U.S. Court of Federal Claims found that the Army had violated three non-disclosure agreements. The court also ordered the Army to pay 1.4 cents to the company for every M855A1 round produced until its patent expires in 2027, totally between $2.2 million to $5.3 million per year.
Deployment.
On June 24, 2010, the United States Army announced it began shipping its new 5.56 mm cartridge, the M855A1 Enhanced Performance Round (EPR), to active combat zones. During testing, the M855A1 performed better than M80 7.62×51mm NATO ball ammunition against certain types of targets (particularly hardened steel), blurring the performance differences that previously separated the two cartridges. The US Army Picatinny Arsenal stated that the new M855A1 offers improved hard target capability, more consistent performance at all distances, enhanced dependability, improved accuracy, reduced muzzle flash, and higher velocity compared to the M855 round. Further, the Army stated the new M855A1 ammunition is tailored for use in M4 carbines, but should also give enhanced performance in M16 rifles and M249 light machine guns. The new 62-grain (4 g) projectile or bullet used in the M855A1 round has a copper core with a 19-grain (1.2 g) steel "stacked-cone" penetrating tip. The M855A1 cartridge is sometimes referred to as "green ammo" because it fires a lead free projectile. It is not necessarily more lethal than the M855, but performs more consistently every time it hits a soft target and retains its performance at longer distances. The EPR can penetrate a 3/8 in thick steel barrier from an M4 at 350 meters and from an M16 at 400 meters. Ballistics for both rounds are similar and don't require weapons to be re-zeroed, but if they are the EPR can be slightly more accurate. The steel-tip penetrator of the M855A1 is noticeably separated from the jacket of the bullet and can spin, but this is part of the design and does not affect performance. The M855A1 costs only 5 cents more per round than the M855. The M855A1 bullet has a 1/8 in greater length than the M855. Because steel and copper are less dense than lead, the bullet is lengthened inside the case to achieve the same weight as its predecessor. The longer bullet and reverse-drawn jacket make it more stable and accurate in-flight. Its steel tip is exposed from the jacket and bronzed for corrosion resistance. The tip is serrated and larger than the M855's steel tip. The M855A1's bullet composition, better aerodynamics, and higher proof pressures give it an extended effective range for penetration and terminal performance. While effectiveness at different ranges is increased, the M855A1 does not increase the effective ranges at which weapons are expected to hit their targets. The Enhanced Performance Round was made to nearly match the trajectory of the M855 to aid in training consistency - the SS109/M855 ballistic coefficient (G7 BC) of 0.151 was improved to 0.152 for the M855A1 - but the ranges to get desired effects are greatly extended.
The M855A1 was put on hold in August 2009 due to the experimental bismuth-tin alloy core exhibiting undependable ballistics at high temperatures. The US Army has since replaced the bismuth-tin alloy core with one of solid copper eliminating the heat issue. The United States Marine Corps purchased 1.8 million rounds in 2010, with plans to adopt the round to replace the interim MK318 SOST rounds used in Afghanistan when the M855A1 project was delayed.
On a media day at Aberdeen Proving Ground on May 4, 2011, reports were given about the M855A1's performance in the field since it was issued 11 months earlier. One primary advantage given by the round is its consistent performance against soft targets. While the older M855 was yaw-dependant, which means its effectiveness depends on its yaw angle when it hits a target, the M855A1 delivers the same effectiveness in a soft target no matter its yaw angle. The new SMP-842 propellant in the round burns quicker in the shorter M4 carbine barrel, ensuring less muzzle flash and greater muzzle velocity. The M855A1 was able to penetrate 3/8 in of steel plate at 300 meters. The round even penetrated concrete masonry units, similar to cinder blocks, at 75 meters from an M16 and at 50 meters from an M4, which the M855 could not do at those ranges. Its accuracy is maintained and sometimes increased, as it was able to shoot a 2 inch group at 600 meters. February 2011 was the first time the M855A1 was used more than the M855, and approximately 30 million M855A1 rounds have been fielded from June 2010 to May 2011.
The M855A1 was put to the test at the 2012 National Rifle Association's National High-Power Rifle Championship at Camp Perry, Ohio in August 2012. The shooter for the Army was Rob Harbison, a contractor supporting small caliber ammunition capability development at Fort Benning Georgia. This was a special event for the Project Manager for Maneuver Ammunition Systems and the Army's Maneuver Center of Excellence as it was an opportunity to showcase the capabilities of the Enhanced Performance Round. With an M16 loaded with M855A1 ammo, Harbison fired a perfect 200 points in the Coast Guard Trophy Match, which is 20 shots fired from the sitting position at 200 yards, finishing 17th out of 365 competitors. He also scored a perfect 100 on the final string of ten shots during the Air Force Cup Trophy Match, fired at 600 yards from the prone position, which is 10 shots in a row within the 12-inch, 10-point ring at 600 yards with combat ammunition. Harbison was happy with the performance of the EPR, with his scores showing that the Army's newest general purpose round is accurate enough to go toe-to-toe in the competition with the best ammo that can be bought or hand-loaded. Harbison even said, "I don't think I could have scored any higher if I was using match-grade competition ammunition." It should be noted that the M855A1 was not fired from 1:7 in rifled barrels used in standard Army rifles, but special Army Marksmanship Unit (AMU) match-grade 1:8 in rifled barrels, which produce more accurate results when firing 62-grain rounds.
From fielding in June 2010 to September 2012, Alliant Techsystems delivered over 350 million M855A1 Enhanced Performance Rounds.
Since its introduction, the M855A1 has been criticized for its propellant causing increased fouling of the gun barrel. Post-combat surveys have reported no issues with the EPR in combat. A series of tests found no significant difference in fouling between the old M855 and the M855A1. However, manufacturers have reported "severe degradation" to barrels of their rifles using the M855A1 in tests. The Army attributes pressure and wear issues with the M855A1 to problems with the primer, which they claim to have addressed with a newly designed primer. It uses a modified four-pronged primer anvil for more reliable powder ignition, with a stab crimp rather than a circumferential crimp to better withstand the new load’s higher chamber pressure, increased from 55000 psi to 62000 psi. During Army carbine testing, the round caused "accelerated bolt wear" from higher chamber pressure and increased bore temperatures. Special Operator testing saw cracks appear on locking lugs and bolts at cam pin holes on average at 6,000 rounds, but sometimes as few as 3,000 rounds during intense automatic firing. Firing several thousand rounds with such high chamber pressures can lead to degraded accuracy over time as parts wear out; these effects can be mitigated through a round counter to keep track of part service life. Weapons with barrel lengths shorter than the M4 firing the M855A1 also experience 50 percent higher pressures than a full-length M16 rifle barrel, which can cause port erosion that can boost the automatic fire rate, increasing the likelihood of jams.
From June 2010 to June 2013, issuing of the M855A1 Enhanced Performance Round removed 1,994 metric tons of lead from the waste stream. 32 gr of lead are eliminated from each M855A1 projectile.
Mk 262.
The Mk 262 is a match quality round manufactured by Black Hills Ammunition made originally for the Special Purpose Rifle (SPR). It uses a 77 gr Sierra MatchKing bullet that is more effective at longer ranges than the standard issue M855 round.
In 1999, SOCOM requested Black Hills Ammunition to develop ammunition for the Mk 12 SPR that SOCOM was designing. For the rifle to be accurate out to 600 yards, Black Hills "militarized" a cartridge that used the Sierra 77 grain OTM (Open Tip Match) projectile; it switched from a .223 Remington to 5.56 mm case, increased pressure loading, crimped and sealed the primer, and added a flash retardant to the powder. The Mk 262 Mod 0 was adopted in 2002. Issues came up in development including reliability problems in different temperatures and when the weapon got dirty, and cycling issues in cold weather due to the slightly shorter barrel of the SPR compared to the full-length M16A2 barrel. The problems were addressed with a slower burning powder with a different pressure for use in the barrel, creating the Mk 262 Mod 1 in 2003. During the product improvement stage, the new propellant was found to be more sensitive to heat in weapon chambers during rapid firings, resulting in increased pressures and failure to extract. This was addressed with another powder blend with higher heat tolerance and improved brass. Also during the stage, Black Hills wanted the bullet to be given a cannelure, which had been previously rejected for fear it would affect accuracy. It was eventually added for effective crimping to ensure that the projectile would not move back into the case and cause a malfunction during auto-load feeding. Although the temperature sensitive powder and new bullet changed specifications, the designation remained as the Mod 1.
According to US DoD sources, the Mk 262 round is capable of making kills at 700 meters. Ballistics tests found that the round caused "consistent initial yaw in soft tissue" between 3-4 in at ranges from 15 feet to 300 meters. Apparently it is superior to the standard M855 round when fired from an M4 or M16 rifle, increasing accuracy from 3-5 minute of angle to 2 minute of angle. It evidently possesses superior stopping power, and can allow for engagements to be extended to up to 700 meters when fired from an 18 inch barrel. It appears that this round can drastically improve the performance of any AR-15 platform weapon chambered to .223/5.56 mm. Superior accuracy, wounding capacity, stopping power and range power has made this the preferred round of many Special Forces operators, and highly desirable as a replacement for the older, Belgian-designed 5.56×45mm SS109/M855 NATO round. In one engagement, a two-man special forces team reported 75 kills with 77 rounds. The Mk 262 has a higher ballistic coefficient than the M855 of (G7) 0.181, meaning it loses less velocity at long-range.
Mk318.
Following early engagements in Afghanistan and Iraq, U.S. Special Operations Forces reported that M855 ammunition used in M4A1 rifles was ineffective. In 2005, the Pentagon issued a formal request to the ammunition industry for “enhanced” ammunition. The only business that responded was the Federal Cartridge Company, owned by Alliant Techsystems. Working with the Naval Surface Warfare Center Crane Division, the team created performance objectives for the new ammo: increased consistency from shot to shot regardless of temperature changes, accuracy out of an M4A1 better than 2 minute of angle (2 inches at 100 yards, 3.9 inches at 300 yards), increased stopping power after passing through “intermediate barriers” like walls and car windshields, increased performance and decreased muzzle flash out of shorter barrel FN SCAR rifles, and costs close to the M855. The first prototypes were delivered to the government in August 2007. Increased velocity and decreased muzzle flash were accomplished by the type of powder used. The design of the bullet was called the Open Tip Match Rear Penetrator (OTMRP). The front of it is an open tip backed up by a lead core, while the rear half is solid brass. When the bullet hits a hard barrier, the front half of the bullet smooshes against the barrier, breaking it so the penetrating half of the bullet can go through and hit the target. With the lead section penetrating the target and the brass section following, it was referred to as a "barrier blind" bullet.
Officially designated the Mk318 Mod 0 "Cartridge, Caliber 5.56mm Ball, Carbine, Barrier", and called SOST (Special Operations Science and Technology) ammunition, the 62-grain bullet fragments consistently, even out of a 10.5 in barrel. The lead portion fragments in the first few inches of soft tissue, then the solid copper rear penetrates 18 in of tissue (shown though ballistic gelatin) while tumbling. Out of a 14 in barrel, the Mk318 has a muzzle velocity of 2,925 fps.
In February 2010, the U.S. Marine Corps adopted the Mk318 for use by infantry. To be fielded by an entire branch of the military, the round is classified as having an "open-tip" bullet, similar to the M118LR 7.62 NATO round. The SOST bullet uses a “reverse drawn” forming process. The base of the bullet is made first, the lead core is placed on top of it, and then the jacketing is pulled up around the lead core from bottom to tip. Conventional, and cheaper, bullets are made with the method of the jacket drawn from the nose to an exposed lead base. The reverse drawn technique leaves an open tip as a byproduct of the manufacturing process, and is not specifically designed for expansion or to affect terminal ballistics. The Pentagon legally cleared the rounds for Marine use in late January. The Marines fielded the Mk318 gradually and in small numbers. Initial studies showed that insurgents hit by it suffered larger exit wounds, although information was limited. SOST rounds were used alongside M855 rounds in situations where the SOST would be more effective. In July 2010, the Marines purchased 1.8 million M855A1 Enhanced Performance Rounds, in addition to millions of Mk318 rounds in service, as part of its effort to replace its M855 ammo. As of May 2015, Marine combat units still deploy with a mixture of both SOST and M855 rounds.
As the issue of environmentally friendly ammo grew, the Marines looked to see if the Mk318's lead could be replaced while still meeting specifications. They found that by replacing the lead with copper and slightly stretching the jacket around to crimp the nose even more, the bullet's ballistic coefficient increased. To avoid visual confusion with the Mk 262 round, the bullet was entirely nickel-plated for a silver color; the enhanced silver-colored copper jacketed, open tip match, 62-grain projectile was named the Mk318 Mod 1. The Marine Corps will make a decision as whether to field the Mk 318 Mod 1 or M855A1 as its standard rifle round.
5.6mm Gw Pat 90.
The 5.6mm Gw Pat 90 or GP 90 (5.6 mm Rifle Cartridge 90), is the standard round used by the Swiss military in its rifle, the SIG SG 550. The cartridge is also known as the Cart 5.6mm 90 F to the French and Italian speaking Swiss militiamen. The Swiss refer to the round as the 5.6 mm Gw Pat 90, although it is interchangeable with the 5.56×45mm NATO and .223 Remington round. The Gw Pat 90 round firing a 4.1 g (63 gr) FMJ bullet is optimized for use in 5.56 mm (.223 in) caliber barrels with a 254 mm (1:10 in) twist rate.
The Gw Pat 90 was designed for the SIG SG 550 when it came into production in 1987, replacing the SIG SG 510. Previous experience of a change in standard rifle had proved that changing the distance of fire for the training ranges was more expensive than the design of a new ammunition; this prompted the design of a cartridge nominally capable at 300 meters. The cartridge was also designed to reduce pollution by controlling lead emissions. The bullet was originally clad with a nickel alloy jacket, however, this was found to cause excessive barrel wear, so in 1998 the nickel jackets were replaced with tombac jackets. In addition, in 1999 a copper plug was added to the base of the bullet to address environmental concerns.
The ammunition is currently (2009) produced by RUAG Ammotec, a subsidiary of the RUAG group. The ammunition is manufactured in three variations: the standard FMJ round, the tracer round, and a blank round.
The FMJ cartridge has a Copper-Zinc alloy case and uses a double base propellant. The bullet is a 4.1 g (63 gr) tombac jacketed FMJ projectile with a G1 ballistic coefficient of 0.331 (ICAO) / 0.337 (Army Metro). The projectile contains approximately 95% Pb, 2% Sb, 3% Cu, and was designed for terminal ballistic instability. The required accuracy for Gw Pat 90 ammunition out of factory test barrels is 63 mm (0.72 MOA) for 10 rounds (100% radius measurement method) out to 300 m. The Gw Pat 90 cartridge dimensions are in accordance with the civilian C.I.P. standards for the .223 Remington C.I.P. chambering.
The Gw Pat 90 is used both in the Swiss military and in sport shooting. The very high level of individual training in the Swiss militia (every single soldier bearing a weapon has to shoot for qualification once a year; see Gun politics in Switzerland) and the overall use of the Gw Pat 90 by the many Swiss citizens who shoot in competitions and for amusement has resulted in significant input on its usage. Over 1 billion cartridges had been produced as of 2005[ [update]].

</doc>
<doc id="35023" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35023" title="7.62 mm caliber">
7.62 mm caliber

7.62 mm caliber is a nominal caliber used for a number of different cartridges. Historically, this class of cartridge was commonly known as .30 caliber, the Imperial unit equivalent, and was most commonly used for indicating a class of full power military main battle rifle (MBR) cartridges. The measurement equals 0.30 inches or 3 decimal lines, written .3" and read as Three-Line.
7.62 mm refers to the internal diameter of the barrel at the lands (the raised helical ridges in rifled gun barrels). The actual bullet caliber is normally 7.82 mm (.308 in), although Soviet weapons commonly use a 7.91 mm (.311 in) bullet, as do older British (.303 British) and Japanese cartridges.
Pistol cartridges in 7.62 mm caliber.
There are many pistol cartridges in this caliber, but most common are:
Revolver cartridges in 7.62 mm caliber.
Some of the revolver cartridges in this caliber are:
Rifle cartridges in 7.62 mm caliber.
The most common & historical rifle cartridges in this caliber are:

</doc>
<doc id="35024" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35024" title="800s (decade)">
800s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35025" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35025" title="800">
800

Year 800 (DCCC) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. It was around this time that the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years, so from this time on, the years began to be known as 800 and onwards.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35026" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35026" title="810s">
810s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35027" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35027" title="820s">
820s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35028" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35028" title="830s">
830s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35029" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35029" title="840s">
840s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35030" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35030" title="850s">
850s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35031" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35031" title="860s">
860s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35032" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35032" title="870s">
870s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35033" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35033" title="880s">
880s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35034" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35034" title="890s">
890s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35035" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35035" title="790s">
790s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35036" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35036" title="780s">
780s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35037" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35037" title="770s">
770s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35038" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35038" title="760s">
760s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35039" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35039" title="750s">
750s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35040" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35040" title="1750s">
1750s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35041" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35041" title="740s">
740s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35042" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35042" title="730s">
730s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35043" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35043" title="720s">
720s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35044" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35044" title="710s">
710s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35045" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35045" title="1710s">
1710s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35046" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35046" title="700s (decade)">
700s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35051" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35051" title="1593">
1593

Year 1593 (MDXCIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35052" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35052" title="1079">
1079

Year 1079 (MLXXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35053" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35053" title="1142">
1142

Year 1142 (MCXLII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35054" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35054" title="1066">
1066

 
Year 1066 (MLXVI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The year was a turning point in English history due to the Battle of Hastings and ensuing Norman conquest of England. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By area.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35055" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35055" title="742">
742

Year 742 (DCCXLII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 742 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35056" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35056" title="814">
814

Year 814 (DCCCXIV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35057" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35057" title="1677">
1677

Year 1677 (MDCLXXVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35058" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35058" title="1596">
1596

1596 (MDXCVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35059" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35059" title="1716">
1716

Year 1716 (MDCCXVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35060" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35060" title="1646">
1646

Year 1646 (MDCXLVI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35061" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35061" title="60 Minutes">
60 Minutes

60 Minutes is an American newsmagazine television program that is broadcast on the CBS television network. Debuting in 1968, the program was created by Don Hewitt, who chose to set it apart from other news programs by using a unique style of reporter-centered investigation. In 2002, "60 Minutes" was ranked at #6 on TV Guide's 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. "The New York Times" has called it "one of the most esteemed news magazines on American television".
Broadcast history.
Early years.
The program employed a magazine format, similar to that of the Canadian program "W5", which premiered two years earlier. It pioneered many of the most important investigative journalism procedures and techniques, including re-editing interviews, hidden cameras, and "gotcha journalism" visits to the home or office of an investigative subject. Similar programs sprang up in Australia and Canada during the 1970s, as well as on local television news.
Initially, "60 Minutes" aired as a bi-weekly show hosted by Harry Reasoner and Mike Wallace, debuting on September 24, 1968, and alternating weeks with other CBS News productions on Tuesday evenings at 10:00 p.m. Eastern Time. The first edition, described by Reasoner in the opening as a "kind of a magazine for television," featured the following segments:
The first "magazine-cover" chroma key was a photo of two helmeted policemen (for the Clark interview segment). Wallace and Reasoner sat in chairs on opposite sides of the set, which had a cream-colored backdrop; the more famous black backdrop (which is still used as of 2015[ [update]]) did not appear until the following year. The logo was in Helvetica type with the word "Minutes" spelled in all lower-case letters; the logo most associated with the show (rendered in Eurostile type with "Minutes" spelled in uppercase) did not appear until about 1974. Further, to extend the magazine motif, the producers added a "Vol. xx, No. xx" to the title display on the chroma key; modeled after the volume and issue number identifications featured in print magazines, this was used until about 1971. The trademark stopwatch, however, did not appear on the inaugural broadcast; it would not debut until several episodes later. Alpo dog food was the sole sponsor of the first program.
Don Hewitt, who had been a producer of the "CBS Evening News" with Walter Cronkite, sought out Wallace as a stylistic contrast to Reasoner. According to one historian of the show, the idea of the format was to make the hosts the reporters, to always feature stories that were of national importance but focused upon individuals involved with, or in conflict with, those issues, and to limit the reports' airtime to around 13 minutes. However, the initial season was troubled by lack of network confidence, as the program did not garner ratings much higher than that of other CBS News documentaries. As a rule, during that era, news programming during prime time lost money; networks mainly scheduled public affairs programs in prime time in order to bolster the prestige of their news departments, and thus boost ratings for the regular evening newscasts, which were seen by far more people than documentaries and the like. "60 Minutes" struggled under that stigma during its first three years.
Changes to "60 Minutes" came fairly early in the program's history. When Reasoner left CBS to co-anchor ABC's evening newscast (he would return to CBS and "60 Minutes" in 1978), Morley Safer joined the team in 1970, and he took over Reasoner's duties of reporting less aggressive stories. However, when Richard Nixon began targeting press access and reporting, even Safer, formerly the CBS News bureau chief in Saigon and London, began to do "hard" investigative reports, and during the 1970–71 season alone "60 Minutes" reported on cluster bombs, the South Vietnamese Army, draft dodgers, Nigeria, the Middle East, and Northern Ireland.
Effects from the Prime Time Access Rule.
By 1971, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) introduced the Prime Time Access Rule, which freed local network affiliates in the top 50 markets (in practice, the entire network) to take a half-hour of prime time from the networks on Mondays through Saturdays and one full hour on Sundays. Because nearly all affiliates found production costs for the FCC's intended goal of increased public affairs programming very high and the ratings (and by association, advertising revenues) low, making it mostly unprofitable, the FCC created an exception for network-authored news and public affairs shows. After a six-month hiatus in late 1971, CBS found a prime place for "60 Minutes" in a portion of that displaced time, 6:00 to 7:00 p.m. (Eastern; 5:00 to 6:00 Central Time on Sundays, in January 1972.
This proved somewhat less than satisfactory, however, because in order to accommodate CBS' telecasts of late afternoon National Football League (NFL) football games, "60 Minutes" went on hiatus during the fall from 1972 to 1975 (and the summer of 1972). This took place because football telecasts were protected contractually from interruptions in the wake of the infamous "Heidi Bowl" incident on NBC in November 1968. Despite the irregular scheduling, the program's hard-hitting reports attracted a steadily growing audience, particularly during the waning days of the Vietnam War and the gripping events of the Watergate scandal; at that time, few if any other major network news shows did in-depth investigative reporting to the degree carried out by "60 Minutes." Eventually, during the summers of 1973 through 1975, CBS did allow the program back onto the prime time schedule proper, on Fridays in 1973 and Sundays the two years thereafter, as a replacement for programs aired during the regular television season.
It was only when the FCC returned an hour to the networks on Sundays (for children's/family or news programming), which had been taken away from them four years earlier, in a 1975 amendment to the Access Rule that CBS finally found a viable permanent timeslot for "60 Minutes." When a family-oriented drama, "Three for the Road", ended after a 12-week run in the fall, the newsmagazine took its place at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time (6:00 Central) on December 7. It has aired at that time since, for 40 years as of 2015[ [update]], making "60 Minutes" not only the longest-running prime time program currently in production, but also the television program (excluding daily programs such as evening newscasts or morning news-talk shows) broadcasting for the longest length of time at a single time period each week in U.S. television history.
This move, and the addition of then-White House correspondent Dan Rather to the reporting team, made the program into a strong ratings hit and, eventually, a general cultural phenomenon. This was no less than a stunning reversal of the historically poor ratings performances of documentary programs on network television. By 1976, "60 Minutes" became the top-rated program on Sunday nights in the U.S. By 1979, it had achieved the #1 spot among all television programs in the Nielsen ratings, unheard of before for a news broadcast in prime time. This success translated into great profits for CBS; advertising rates went from $17,000 per 30-second spot in 1975 to $175,000 in 1982.
The program sometimes does not start until after 7:00 p.m. Eastern, due largely to CBS' live broadcast of NFL games. At the conclusion of an NFL game, "60 Minutes" will air in its entirety. However, on the West Coast (and all of the Mountain Time Zone), because the actual end of the live games is much earlier in the afternoon in comparison to the Eastern and Central time zones, "60 Minutes" is always able to start at its normal start time of 7:00 p.m. Pacific Time, leaving affiliates free to broadcast local news, the "CBS Evening News", and other local or syndicated programming leading up to "60 Minutes". The program's success has also led CBS Sports to schedule events (such as the Masters Tournament and daytime games of the NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament) leading into "60 Minutes" and the rest of the network's primetime lineup, thus (again, except on the West Coast) pre-empting the Sunday editions of the "CBS Evening News" and affiliates' local newscasts.
With complaints of late starts because of late NFL games, starting in the 2012-13 season, CBS officially changed the start time of "60 Minutes" to 7:30 p.m. Eastern time on Sundays when the network is scheduled to air an NFL doubleheader (there are nine during the NFL season – eight during the first 16 weeks of the season, and the final week).
Pre-emptions since 1978.
The program has rarely been pre-empted since 1978. Two notable pre-emptions occurred in 1976 and 1977, to make room for the annual telecast of "The Wizard of Oz", which had recently returned to CBS after having been shown on NBC for eight years. However, CBS would, in later years, schedule the film so that it would no longer pre-empt "60 Minutes". Another exception is on years when CBS airs the Super Bowl or since 2003, alternating years where the AFC Championship Game has the 6:30 p.m. Eastern start time, which is played into prime-time and followed by a special lead-out program.
On September 22, 2013, CBS chose to pre-empt "60 Minutes" as a result of carrying the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards after an NFL doubleheader.
Radio broadcast and Internet distribution.
"60 Minutes" is also simulcast on several CBS Radio stations (such as WCBS in New York City, KNX in Los Angeles, WBBM in Chicago, WWJ in Detroit and KCBS in San Francisco) when it airs locally on their sister CBS Television Network affiliate; even in the Central and Eastern time zones, the show is aired at the top of the hour at 7 p.m./6 p.m Central (barring local sports play-by-play pre-emptions and breaking news coverage) no matter how long the show is delayed on CBS Television, resulting in radio listeners often hearing the show on those stations ahead of the television broadcast. An audio version of each broadcast without advertising began to be distributed via podcast and the iTunes Store, starting with the September 23, 2007 broadcast. Video from "60 Minutes" (including full episodes) is also made available for streaming several hours after the program's initial broadcast on CBSNews.com and CBS Interactive property CNET TV.
Format.
"60 Minutes" consists of three long-form news stories, without superimposed graphics. There is a commercial break between two stories. Each story is introduced from a set with a backdrop resembling pages from a magazine story on the same topic. The program undertakes its own investigations and follows up on investigations instigated by national newspapers and other sources.
Reporting tone.
"60 Minutes" blends the probing journalism of the seminal 1950s CBS series "See It Now" with Edward R. Murrow (a show for which Hewitt served as the director for its first few years) and the personality profiles of another Murrow program, "Person to Person". In Hewitt's own words, "60 Minutes" blends "higher Murrow" and "lower Murrow".
"Point/Counterpoint" segment.
For most of the 1970s, the program included "Point/Counterpoint", in which a liberal and a conservative commentator debated a particular issue. This segment originally featured James J. Kilpatrick representing the conservative side and Nicholas von Hoffman for the liberal, with Shana Alexander taking over for von Hoffman after he departed in 1974. The segment was an innovation that caught the public imagination as a live version of competing editorials. "Point/Counterpoint" was also lampooned by the NBC comedy series "Saturday Night Live", which featured Jane Curtin and Dan Aykroyd as debaters, with Aykroyd typically beginning his remarks with, "Jane, you ignorant slut"; in the 1980 film "Airplane!", in which the "faux" Kilpatrick argues in favor of the plane crashing; and in the earlier sketch comedy film, "The Kentucky Fried Movie", where the segment was called "Count/Pointercount".
A similar concept was revived briefly in March 2003, this time featuring Bob Dole and Bill Clinton, former opponents in the 1996 presidential election. The pair agreed to do ten segments, called "Clinton/Dole" and "Dole/Clinton" in alternating weeks, but did not continue into the 2003–04 fall television season. Reports indicated that the segments were considered too gentlemanly, in the style of the earlier "Point/Counterpoint", and lacked the feistiness of "Crossfire".
Andy Rooney segment.
From 1978 to 2011, the program usually ended with a (usually light-hearted and humorous) commentary by Andy Rooney expounding on topics of wildly varying import, ranging from international politics, to economics, and to personal philosophy on everyday life. One recurring topic was measuring the amount of coffee in coffee cans.
Rooney's pieces, particularly one in which he referred to actor Mel Gibson as a "wacko," on occasion led to complaints from viewers. Rooney published several books documenting his contributions to the program, including "Years Of Minutes" and "A Few Minutes With Andy Rooney". Rooney retired from "60 Minutes", delivering his final commentary on October 2, 2011; it was his 1,097th commentary over his 34-year career on the program. He died one month later, on November 4, 2011. The November 13, 2011 edition of "60 Minutes" featured an hour-long tribute to Rooney and his career, and included a rebroadcast of his final commentary segment.
Opening sequence.
The opening sequence features a "60 Minutes" "magazine cover" with the show's trademark, an Aristo stopwatch, intercut with preview clips of the episode's stories. The sequence ends with each of the current correspondents and hosts introducing themselves. The last host who appears (currently Scott Pelley) then currently says, "Those stories tonight on "60 Minutes"". When Rooney was a prominent fixture, the final line was "Those stories and Andy Rooney, tonight on "60 Minutes"". Before that, and whenever Rooney did not appear, the final line was "Those stories and more, tonight on "60 Minutes"".
"60 Minutes" was the first, and remains the only, regularly scheduled program in the U.S. to never have used theme music. The only "theme" is the ticking of the stopwatch, which counts off each of the broadcast's titular 60 minutes, starting from zero at the beginning of each show. It is seen during the opening title sequence, before each commercial break, and at the tail-end of the closing credits, and each time it appears it displays (within reasonable accuracy) the elapsed time of the episode to that point.
On October 29, 2006, the opening sequence changed from a black background, which had been used for over a decade, to white. Also, the gray background for the Aristo stopwatch in the "cover" changed to red, the color for the title text changed to white, and the stopwatch itself changed from the diagonal position it had been oriented in for 31 years to an upright position.
Web content.
Videos and transcripts of "60 Minutes" editions, as well as clips that were not included in the broadcast are available on the program's website. In September 2010, the program launched a website called "60 Minutes Overtime", in which stories broadcast on-air are discussed in further detail.
iPad content.
CBS Interactive released a mobile app in 2013, "60 Minutes for iPad", which allows users to watch "60 Minutes" on iPad devices and access some of the show's archival footage.
Correspondents and hosts.
Former correspondents and hosts.
† = Deceased
Commentators.
Commentators for "60 Minutes" have included:
† = Deceased
Ratings and recognition.
Nielsen ratings.
Based on ratings, "60 Minutes" is the most successful program in U.S. television history, since it was moved into its present timeslot in 1975. For five of its seasons it has been that year's top program, a feat matched by the sitcoms "All in the Family" and "The Cosby Show", and surpassed only by the reality competition series "American Idol", which had been the #1 show for eight consecutive seasons from the 2003–04 television season up to the 2010–11 season. "60 Minutes" was a top ten show for 23 seasons in a row (1977–2000), an unsurpassed record.
"60 Minutes" first broke into the Nielsen Top 20 during the 1976–77 season. The following season, it was the fourth-most-watched program, and by 1979–80, it was the number one show. During the 21st century, it remains among the top 20 programs in the Nielsen ratings, and the highest-rated news magazine.
The November 16, 2008 edition, featuring an interview with President-Elect Barack Obama, earned a total viewership of 25.1 million viewers.
The October 6, 2013 edition (which was delayed by 44 minutes that evening due to a Denver Broncos-Dallas Cowboys NFL game) drew 17.94 million viewers; retaining 63% of the 28.32 million viewers of its lead-in, and making it the most watched "60 Minutes" broadcast since December 16, 2012.
The December 1, 2013 edition (delayed 50 minutes due to a Broncos-Kansas City Chiefs game) was watched by 18.09 million viewers, retaining 66% of its NFL lead-in (which earned 28.11 million viewers during the 7:00 p.m. hour).
Recognition.
Emmy Awards.
As of October 1, 2013, "60 Minutes" had won a total of 106 Emmy Awards, a record unsurpassed by any other primetime program on U.S. television.
Peabody Awards.
The program has won 20 Peabody Awards for segments including "All in the Family", an investigation into abuses by government and military contractors; "The CIA's Cocaine", which uncovered CIA involvement in drug smuggling; "Friendly Fire", a report on incidents of friendly fire in the Gulf War; "The Duke Rape Case", an investigation into accusations of rape at an off campus lacrosse team party in 2006; and "The Killings in Haditha", an investigation into the killing of Iraqi civilians by U.S. Marines.
Other awards.
The show received an Investigative Reporter and Editor medal for their segment "The Osprey", documenting a Marine cover-up of deadly flaws in the V-22 Osprey aircraft.
Impact on innocent victims.
In 1983, a report by Morley Safer, "Lenell Geter's in Jail", helped exonerate a Texas man who was wrongly convicted and imprisoned for armed robbery.
Record of longest-running show.
"60 Minutes" currently holds the record for the longest continuously running program of any genre scheduled during American network prime time; it has aired at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time on Sundays since December 7, 1975 (although since 1998, it is officially scheduled for 7:30 p.m. Eastern Time on Sundays where a CBS affiliate has a late NFL game). The longer-running "Meet the Press" has also aired in prime time, but currently airs during the daytime, as it has for most of its history. The Walt Disney anthology television series, which premiered in 1954, and the "Hallmark Hall of Fame", which has aired since 1951, have aired longer, but none of them has aired in prime time continually, as "60 Minutes" has done.
Controversies.
The show has been praised for landmark journalism and received many awards. However, it has also become embroiled in some controversy, including (in order of appearance):
Unintended acceleration.
On November 23, 1986, "60 Minutes" aired a segment greenlit by Hewitt, concerning the Audi 5000 automobile, a popular German luxury car. The story covered a supposed problem of "unintended acceleration" when the brake pedal was pushed, with emotional interviews with six people who sued Audi (unsuccessfully) after they crashed their cars, including one woman whose 6-year-old boy had been killed. Footage was shown of an Audi 5000 with the accelerator moving down on its own, accelerating the car, after an expert witness employed by one of the plaintiffs modified it with a concealed device to cause it to do so. Independent investigators concluded that this was most likely due to driver error, where the driver let their foot slip off the brake and onto the accelerator. Tests by Audi and independent journalists showed that even with the throttle wide open, the car would simply stall if the brakes were actually being used.
The incident devastated Audi sales in the United States, which did not rebound for 15 years. The initial incidents which prompted the report were found by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and Transport Canada to have been attributable to operator error, where car owners had depressed the accelerator pedal instead of the brake pedal. CBS issued a partial retraction, without acknowledging the test results of involved government agencies. Years later, "Dateline NBC", a rival to "60 Minutes", was found guilty of similar tactics regarding the fuel tank integrity of General Motors pickup trucks.
Alar.
In February 1989, "60 Minutes" aired a report by the Natural Resources Defense Council claiming that the use of daminozide (Alar) on apples presented an unacceptably high health risk to consumers. Apple sales dropped and CBS was sued unsuccessfully by apple growers. Alar was subsequently banned for use on food crops in the U.S. by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Werner Erhard.
On March 3, 1991, "60 Minutes" broadcast "Werner Erhard," which dealt with controversies involving Erhard's personal and business life. One year after the "60 Minutes" piece aired, Erhard filed a lawsuit against CBS, claiming that the broadcast contained several "false, misleading and defamatory" statements about himself. One month after filing the lawsuit, Erhard filed for dismissal. Erhard later told Larry King in an interview that he dropped the suit after receiving legal advice telling him that in order to win it, it would not be sufficient to prove that CBS knew the allegations were false, but that he would also need to prove that CBS acted with malice. Because of factual inaccuracies, the segment was later removed by CBS from its archives, with a disclaimer: "This segment has been deleted at the request of CBS News for legal or copyright reasons."
Brown & Williamson.
In 1995, former Brown & Williamson Vice President for Research and Development Jeffrey Wigand provided information to "60 Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman that B&W had systematically hidden the health risks of their cigarettes (see ). Furthermore, it was alleged that B&W had introduced foreign agents (such as fiberglass and ammonia) with the intent of enhancing the effect of nicotine. Bergman began to produce a piece based upon the information, but ran into opposition from Don Hewitt who, along with CBS lawyers, feared a billion dollar lawsuit from Brown and Williamson for tortious interference for encouraging Wigand to violate his nondisclosure agreement. A number of people at CBS would benefit from a sale of CBS to Westinghouse Electric Corporation, including the head of CBS lawyers and CBS News. Also, because of the interview, the son of CBS President Laurence Tisch (who also controlled Lorillard Tobacco) was among the people from the big tobacco companies at risk of being caught having committed perjury. Due to Hewitt's hesitation, "The Wall Street Journal" instead broke Wigand's story. The "60 Minutes" piece was eventually aired with substantially altered content and minus some of the most damning evidence against B&W. The exposé of the incident was published in an article in "Vanity Fair" by Marie Brenner, entitled "The Man Who Knew Too Much".
"The New York Times" wrote: "the traditions of Edward R. Murrow were diluted in the process," though the newspaper revised the quote slightly, suggesting that "60 Minutes" and CBS had "betrayed the legacy of Edward R. Murrow". The incident was turned into a seven-times Oscar-nominated feature film entitled "The Insider", directed by Michael Mann and starring Russell Crowe as Wigand, Al Pacino as Bergman, and Christopher Plummer as Mike Wallace. Wallace denounced the portrayal of him as inaccurate to his stance on the issue.
U.S. Customs Service.
"60 Minutes" alleged in 1997 that agents of the U.S. Customs Service ignored drug trafficking across the Mexico – United States border at San Diego. The only evidence was a memorandum apparently written by Rudy Camacho, who was the head of the San Diego branch office. Based on this memo, CBS alleged that Camacho had allowed trucks belonging to a particular firm to cross the border unimpeded. Mike Horner, a former Customs Service employee, had passed the memos on to "60 Minutes", and even provided a copy with an official stamp. Camacho was not consulted about the piece, and his career was devastated in the immediate term as his own department placed suspicion on him. In the end, it turned out that Horner had forged the documents as an act of revenge for his treatment within the Customs Service. Camacho sued CBS and settled for an undisclosed amount of money in damages. Hewitt was forced to issue an on-air retraction.
Kennewick Man.
A legal battle between archaeologists and the Umatilla tribe over the remains of a skeleton, nicknamed Kennewick Man, was reported by "60 Minutes" on October 25, 1998, to which the Umatilla tribe reacted negatively. The tribe considered the segment heavily biased in favor of the scientists, cutting out important arguments, such as explanations of Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. The report focused heavily on the racial politics of the controversy and also added inflammatory arguments, such as questioning the legitimacy of Native American sovereignty – much of the racial focus of the segment was later reported to have been either unfounded and/or misinterpreted.
Timothy McVeigh.
On March 12, 2000, "60 Minutes" aired an interview with Oklahoma City bomber, Timothy McVeigh. At the time, McVeigh had already been convicted and sentenced to death for the April 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building and subsequent deaths of 168 people. On the program, McVeigh was given the opportunity to vent against the government. Following the program, a federal policy called the Special Confinement Unit Media Policy was enacted prohibiting face-to-face interviews with death row inmates. A federal inmate challenged the policy in "Hammer v. Ashcroft", under which the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit upheld the prison policy. In March 2010, the United States Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal in the case, and the policy limiting media access to death row inmates remains in place. CBS refuses to show the entire interview, and has stated no reasons.
Viacom/CBS cross-promotion.
In recent years, the program has been accused of promoting books, films, and interviews with celebrities who are published or promoted by sister businesses of media conglomerate Viacom (which owned CBS from 2000 to 2005, and is now a separate company owned by National Amusements, which is also the parent of CBS Corporation) and publisher Simon & Schuster (which remains a part of CBS Corporation after the 2005 CBS/Viacom split), without disclosing the journalistic conflict-of-interest to viewers.
Killian documents controversy.
The Killian documents controversy (also referred to as Memogate or Rathergate) involved six documents critical of President George W. Bush's service in the Texas Air National Guard in 1972–73. Four of these documents were presented as authentic in a "60 Minutes Wednesday" broadcast aired by CBS on September 8, 2004, less than two months before the 2004 Presidential Election, but it was later found that CBS had failed to authenticate the documents. Subsequently, several typewriter and typography experts concluded the documents are forgeries, as have some media sources. No forensic document examiners or typography experts authenticated the documents, which may not be possible without original documents. The provider of the documents, Lt. Col. Bill Burkett, claimed to have burned the originals after faxing copies to CBS.
"The Internet Is Infected" episode and the false hacker photo.
A segment aired on the March 29, 2009 edition of "60 Minutes", "The Internet Is Infected", featured an interview with Don Jackson, a data protection professional for SecureWorks. Jackson himself declares in the program that: "A part of my job is to know the enemy". However, during the interview, Jackson showed a photo of Finnish upper-level comprehensive school pupils and misidentified them as Russian hackers. In the photo, one of the children is wearing a jacket with the Coat of Arms of Finland on it. Another one is wearing a cap which clearly has the logo of Karjala, a Finnish brand of beer, on it. The principal of the school in Taivalkoski confirmed that the photo was taken at the school about five years before the program was broadcast.
The photo's exact origins are unknown, but it is widely known in Finland, having been originally posted to a Finnish social networking site, IRC-Galleria, in the early 2000s. It spread all over Finnish internet communities, and even originated a couple of patriotically titled (but intentionally misspelled) mock sites. "60 Minutes" later issued a correction and on-air apology.
Benghazi report.
Subsequent to the 2012 Benghazi attack, "60 Minutes" aired report by correspondent Lara Logan on October 27, 2013 in which British military contractor, Dylan Davies, identified by CBS under the pseudonym “Morgan Jones,” described racing to the Benghazi compound several hours after the main assault was over, scaling a 12-foot wall and knocking out a lone fighter with the butt of a rifle. He also claimed to have visited a Benghazi hospital earlier that night where he saw Ambassador Christopher Stevens' body.
In the days following the report, Davies' personal actions were challenged. The FBI, which had interviewed Davies several times and considered him a credible source, said the account Davies had given them was different than what he told "60 Minutes". Davies stood by his story, but the inconsistency ultimately prompted "60 Minutes" to conclude it was a mistake to include Davies in their report and a correction was issued.
Following the correction, a journalistic review was conducted by Al Ortiz, CBS News' executive director of standards and practices. He determined that red flags about Davies' account were missed. Davies had said to the program and written in his book that he told an alternative version of his actions to his employer, who he said had demanded that he stay inside his Benghazi villa as the attack unfolded. That alternative version was shared with US authorities and 60 Minutes was unable to prove the story Davies had told them was true. The incident led CBS News to request that Logan and her producer, Max McLellan, take a leave of absence.
Davies' book, "The Embassy House", was published two days after the "60 Minutes" report, by Threshold Editions, part of the Simon and Schuster unit of CBS. It was pulled from shelves once "60 Minutes" issued its correction.
NSA report.
On December 15, 2013, "60 Minutes" aired a report on the National Security Agency (NSA) that was widely criticized as false and a "puff piece." The story was reported by John Miller, who once worked in the office of the Director of National Intelligence.
Tesla Automaker report.
On March 30, 2014, "60 Minutes" presented a story on the Tesla Model S luxury electric automobile in a segment, with Scott Pelley conducting an interview with CEO Elon Musk concerning the car brand as well as his SpaceX company. Within a day, the automotive blog site Jalopnik reported that the sounds accompanying footage of the car shown during the story were actually sounds from a traditional gasoline engine dubbed over the footage, when in reality the electric car is much quieter. CBS released a statement explaining that the sound was the result of an audio editing error, and subsequently removed the noise from the online version of the piece. However, several news outlets, as well as Jalopnik itself, have expressed doubt over the authenticity of this explanation, noting the similar scandal involving Tesla Motors and "The New York Times" in 2013.
Spin-offs.
The main "60 Minutes" show has created a number of spin-offs over the years.
"30 Minutes".
"30 Minutes" was a newsmagazine aimed at children that was patterned after "60 Minutes", airing as the final program in CBS's Saturday morning lineup from 1978 to 1982. It was hosted by Christopher Glenn (who also served as the voice-over for the interstitial program "In the News" and was an anchor on the CBS Radio Network), along with Betsy Aaron (1978–1980) and Betty Ann Bowser (1980–1982).
"60 Minutes More".
"60 Minutes More" was a spin-off that ran for one season from 1996 to 1997. The episodes featured popular stories from the past that were expanded with updates on the original story. Each episode featured three of these segments.
"60 Minutes II".
In 1999, a second edition of "60 Minutes" was started in the U.S., called "60 Minutes II". This edition was later renamed "60 Minutes" by CBS for the fall of 2004 in an effort to sell it as a high-quality program, since some had sarcastically referred to it as "60 Minutes, Jr." CBS News president Andrew Heyward said, "The Roman numeral II created some confusion on the part of the viewers and suggested a watered-down version". However, a widely known controversy which came to be known as "Rathergate", regarding a report that aired September 8, 2004, caused another name change. The program was retitled "60 Minutes Wednesday" both to differentiate itself and to avoid tarnishing the Sunday edition, as the editions were editorially independent from one another. It reverted to its original Roman numeral title on July 8, 2005, when the program moved to Fridays in an 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time slot to finish its run. The show's final broadcast was on September 2, 2005.
"60 Minutes on CNBC".
In 2011, CNBC began airing a "60 Minutes" spin-off of its own, called "60 Minutes on CNBC". Hosted by Lesley Stahl and Steve Kroft, it airs updated business-related reports seen on the original broadcasts and offers footage that were not included when the segments first aired.
"60 Minutes Sports".
CBS News began producing a sports-themed version of "60 Minutes" for corporate sister and premium channel Showtime in January 2013. The program, titled "60 Minutes Sports", includes two original segments along with a classic interview from the show's archives. Personalities from CBS Sports join the "60 Minutes" team in contributing.
25th anniversary edition.
For the "60 Minutes" 25th anniversary in 1993, Charles Kuralt interviewed Don Hewitt, the active correspondents, some former correspondents, and revisited notable stories and celebrities.
International versions.
Australia.
The Australian version of "60 Minutes" premiered on February 11, 1979. It still airs each Sunday night at 7:30 p.m. on the Nine Network and affiliates.
Reporter Richard Carleton suffered a heart attack on May 7, 2006. He asked a question at a news conference for the Beaconsfield Mine collapse, then walked out and suffered cardiac arrest. Paramedics tried to revive him for 20 minutes until an ambulance arrived, but was pronounced dead on arrival.
Although Nine Network has the rights to the format, as of 2007, it does not have rights to stories from the U.S. program. Nevertheless, stories from the flagship "60 Minutes" program in the U.S. often air on the Australian program by subleasing them from Network Ten. In 1980, "60 Minutes" won a Logie Award for their investigation of lethal abuses at the Chelmsford psychiatric hospital in Sydney.
Germany.
In the mid-1980s, an edited version (approx. 30 minutes in length) of the U.S. broadcast edition of "60 Minutes" was shown for a time on West German television. This version retained the English-language soundtrack of the original, but also featured German subtitles.
New Zealand.
The New Zealand version of "60 Minutes" has aired on national television since 1989, when it was originally launched on TV3. In 1992, the rights were acquired by TVNZ, who began broadcasting it in 1993. The network aired the program for nine years before dropping it in 2002 for its own program, entitled "Sunday", which is currently the highest-rated current affairs show broadcast on New Zealand television, followed by "20/20". "60 Minutes" was broadcast by rival network TV3, before switching to the Sky Television owned Prime channel in 2013, when the contract changed hands.
Portugal.
The original programs are shown in Portugal on SIC Notícias with introductory and closing remarks by journalist Mário Crespo.
Chile.
The news program of National Broadcasting of Chile (TVN), the public television network in that country, was named "60 Minutos" ("60 Minutes") from 1975 to 1988, but the program had no accusations of any kind and no investigative reporting.

</doc>
<doc id="35068" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35068" title="1846">
1846

Year 1846 (MDCCCXLVI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35069" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35069" title="1087">
1087

Year 1087 (MLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35070" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35070" title="96">
96

Year 96 (XCVI) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valens and Vetus (or, less frequently, year 849 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 96 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35071" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35071" title="1830">
1830

Year 1830 (MDCCCXXX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar. It is known in European history as a rather tumultuous year with the July Revolution, the Belgian Revolution and the November Uprising taking place in respectively France, the Low Countries and Poland.

</doc>
<doc id="35072" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35072" title="1803">
1803

Year 1803 (MDCCCIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35073" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35073" title="1804">
1804

Year 1804 (MDCCCIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35074" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35074" title="1805">
1805

Year 1805 (MDCCCV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar. After thirteen years the French First Empire abolished the French Republican Calendar in favour of the Gregorian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35075" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35075" title="1855">
1855

Year 1855 (MDCCCLV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35076" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35076" title="1770">
1770

Year 1770 (MDCCLXX) was a common year starting on Monday (see link for calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 11-day-slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35077" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35077" title="1473">
1473

Year 1473 (MCDLXXIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35078" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35078" title="1630">
1630

Year 1630 (MDCXXX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35079" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35079" title="1571">
1571

Year 1571 (MDLXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35080" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35080" title="1601">
1601

Year 1601 (MDCI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar. January 1 of this year (1601-01-01) is used as the base of file dates and of Active Directory Logon dates by Microsoft Windows. It is also the date from which ANSI dates are counted and were adopted by the American National Standards Institute for use with COBOL and other computer languages. This epoch is the beginning of the 400-year Gregorian leap-year cycle within which digital files first existed; the last year of any such cycle is the only leap year whose year number is divisible by 100. All versions of the Microsoft Windows operating system from Windows 95 onward count units of one hundred nanoseconds from this epoch. It was the first year of the 17th century.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35081" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35081" title="1546">
1546

Year 1546 (MDXLVI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35082" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35082" title="1670">
1670

Year 1670 (MDCLXX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35083" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35083" title="1602">
1602

Year 1602 (MDCII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35084" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35084" title="1604">
1604

Year 1604 (MDCIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35085" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35085" title="1605">
1605

Year 1605 (MDCV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35086" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35086" title="1606">
1606

Year 1606 (MDCVI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35087" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35087" title="1607">
1607

Year 1607 (MDCVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35089" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35089" title="610s">
610s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35090" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35090" title="630s">
630s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35091" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35091" title="604">
604

Year 604 (DCIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 604 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35092" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35092" title="606">
606

Year 606 (DCVI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 606 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35093" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35093" title="816">
816

Year 816 (DCCCXVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35094" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35094" title="817">
817

Year 817 (DCCCXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35095" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35095" title="1665">
1665

Year 1665 (MDCLXV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35096" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35096" title="1609">
1609

Year 1609 (MDCIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35097" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35097" title="1610">
1610

Year 1610 (MDCX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar. It has been posited that 1610 marks the beginning of the Anthropocene, or the 'Age of Man', marking a fundamental change in the relationship between humans and the Earth system.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35098" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35098" title="1612">
1612

Year 1612 (MDCXII) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35099" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35099" title="1550">
1550

Year 1550 (MDL) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35100" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35100" title="1613">
1613

Year 1613 (MDCXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35101" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35101" title="1561">
1561

Year 1561 (MDLXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35102" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35102" title="1614">
1614

Year 1614 (MDCXIV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35103" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35103" title="43 BC">
43 BC

Year 43 BC was either a common year starting on Sunday, Monday or Tuesday or a leap year starting on Sunday or Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Monday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pansa and Hirtius (or, less frequently, year 711 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 43 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35104" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35104" title="106 BC">
106 BC

Year 106 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caepio and Serranus (or, less frequently, year 648 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 106 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35105" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35105" title="1615">
1615

Year 1615 (MDCXV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35106" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35106" title="1616">
1616

Year 1616 (MDCXVI) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35107" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35107" title="840">
840

Year 840 (DCCCXL) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By Place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35108" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35108" title="1619">
1619

Year 1619 (MDCXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35109" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35109" title="1620">
1620

Year 1620 (MDCXX) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35110" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35110" title="1621">
1621

Year 1621 (MDCXXI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35111" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35111" title="843">
843

Year 843 (DCCCXLIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35112" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35112" title="752">
752

Year 752 (DCCLII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 752 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35113" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35113" title="757">
757

 
Year 757 (DCCLVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 757 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35114" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35114" title="710">
710

Year 710 (DCCX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 710 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35115" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35115" title="410">
410

Year 410 (CDX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year after the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1163 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 410 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35116" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35116" title="1470s">
1470s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35117" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35117" title="1480s">
1480s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35118" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35118" title="1450s">
1450s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35119" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35119" title="1150s">
1150s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35120" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35120" title="842">
842

Year 842 (DCCCXLII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35121" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35121" title="754">
754

Year 754 (DCCLIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 754 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35122" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35122" title="772">
772

Year 772 (DCCLXXII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 772 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35123" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35123" title="787">
787

Year 787 (DCCLXXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 787 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35124" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35124" title="795">
795

Year 795 (DCCXCV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 795 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35125" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35125" title="755">
755

Year 755 (DCCLV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 755 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35126" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35126" title="325">
325

Year 325 (CCCXXV) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Proculus and Paulinus (or, less frequently, year 1078 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 325 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35127" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35127" title="380s">
380s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35128" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35128" title="381">
381

Year 381 (CCCLXXXI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Syagrius and Eucherius (or, less frequently, year 1134 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 381 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35129" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35129" title="640s">
640s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35130" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35130" title="650s">
650s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35131" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35131" title="660s">
660s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35132" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35132" title="670s">
670s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35133" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35133" title="680s">
680s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35134" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35134" title="690s">
690s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35135" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35135" title="741">
741

Year 741 (DCCXLI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 741 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35136" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35136" title="688">
688

Year 688 (DCLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 688 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35137" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35137" title="774">
774

Year 774 (DCCLXXIV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 774 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Ecology.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35138" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35138" title="568">
568

Year 568 (DLXVIII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 568 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35139" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35139" title="470s">
470s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35140" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35140" title="1625">
1625

Year 1625 (MDCXXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35141" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35141" title="1627">
1627

Year 1627 (DCXXVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35142" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35142" title="1628">
1628

Year 1628 (MDCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35143" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35143" title="1629">
1629

Year 1629 (MDCXXIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Undated.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35144" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35144" title="1540">
1540

Year 1540 (MDXL) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35145" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35145" title="1560">
1560

Year 1560 (MDLX) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35146" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35146" title="1638">
1638

Year 1638 (MDCXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35147" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35147" title="1588">
1588

Year 1588 (MDLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Monday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35148" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35148" title="1453">
1453

Year 1453 (MCDLIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. It is sometimes cited as the notional end of the Middle Ages by historians who define the medieval period as the time between the Fall of the Western Roman Empire and the fall of the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
January–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35149" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35149" title="1200s (decade)">
1200s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35150" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35150" title="1300s (decade)">
1300s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35151" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35151" title="1310s">
1310s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35152" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35152" title="1320s">
1320s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35153" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35153" title="1380s">
1380s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35154" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35154" title="430s">
430s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35155" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35155" title="430">
430

Year 430 (CDXXX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Valentinianus (or, less frequently, year 1183 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 430 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35156" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35156" title="342 BC">
342 BC

Year 342 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ahala and Rutilus (or, less frequently, year 412 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 342 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35157" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35157" title="771">
771

Year 771 (DCCLXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 771 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Britain.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35158" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35158" title="1090s">
1090s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35159" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35159" title="1099">
1099

Year 1099 (MXCIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35160" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35160" title="1098">
1098

Year 1098 (MXCVIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35161" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35161" title="1631">
1631

Year 1631 (MDCXXXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35162" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35162" title="1633">
1633

Year 1633 (MDCXXXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35163" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35163" title="1070s">
1070s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35164" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35164" title="1071">
1071

Year 1071 (MLXXI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35165" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35165" title="1060s">
1060s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35166" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35166" title="1170s">
1170s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35167" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35167" title="900s (decade)">
900s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35168" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35168" title="1100s (decade)">
1100s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35169" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35169" title="910s">
910s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35170" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35170" title="920s">
920s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35171" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35171" title="930s">
930s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35172" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35172" title="940s">
940s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35173" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35173" title="950s">
950s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35174" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35174" title="960s">
960s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35175" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35175" title="970s">
970s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35176" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35176" title="980s">
980s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35177" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35177" title="990s">
990s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35178" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35178" title="955">
955

Year 955 (CMLV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35179" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35179" title="991">
991

Year 991 (CMXCI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35180" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35180" title="1">
1

Year 1 (I) was a common year starting on Saturday or Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Saturday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. It is a Common year starting on Monday, in the Proleptic Gregorian calendar system. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Paullus (or, less frequently, year 754 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 1 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. It was the first year of the Christian/Common era. The preceding year is 1 BC in the widely used Julian calendar, which does not have a "year zero".
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35182" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35182" title="3">
3

Year 3 (III) was a common year starting on Monday or Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Monday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lamia and Servilius (or, less frequently, year 756 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 3 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
East Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35183" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35183" title="4">
4

Year 4 (IV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Catus and Saturninus (or, less frequently, year 757 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 4 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35184" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35184" title="5">
5

Year 5 (V) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Cinna (or, less frequently, year 758 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 5 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35185" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35185" title="6">
6

Year 6 (VI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Arruntius (or, less frequently, year 759 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 6 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35186" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35186" title="7">
7

Year 7 (VII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Metellus and Nerva (or, less frequently, year 760 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 7 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35187" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35187" title="8">
8

Year 8 (VIII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Camillus and Quinctilianus (or, less frequently, year 761 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 8 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35188" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35188" title="10">
10

Year 10 (X) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, throughout the Roman Empire it was known as the year of the consulship of Dolabella and Silanus (or, less frequently, year 763 "ab urbe condita"). The denomination 10 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for counting years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35189" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35189" title="11">
11

Year 11 (XI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Taurus (or, less frequently, year 764 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 11 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. The Year XI (eleven) is also a year in the French Revolutionary Calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By Place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35190" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35190" title="12">
12

Year 12 (XII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Capito (or, less frequently, year 765 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 12 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35191" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35191" title="1634">
1634

Year 1634 (MDCXXXIV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Wednesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35192" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35192" title="1635">
1635

Year 1635 (MDCXXXV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35193" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35193" title="1637">
1637

Year 1637 (MDCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35195" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35195" title="1639">
1639

Year 1639 (MDCXXXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35198" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35198" title="100BaseVG">
100BaseVG

100BaseVG is a 100 Mbit/s Ethernet standard specified to run over four pairs of category 3 UTP wires (known as voice grade, hence the "VG"). It is also called 100VG-AnyLAN because it was defined to carry both Ethernet and token ring frame types.
100BaseVG was originally proposed by Hewlett-Packard, ratified by the ISO in 1995 and was practically extinct by 1998.
100BaseVG started in the IEEE 802.3 committee as Fast Ethernet. One faction wanted to keep CSMA/CD in order to keep it pure Ethernet, even though the collision domain problem limited the distances to one tenth that of 10BASE-T. Another faction wanted to change to a polling architecture from the hub (they called it "Demand Priority Protocol") in order to maintain the 10baseT distances, and also to make it a deterministic protocol. The first faction argued that, since IEEE 802.3 was the Ethernet committee, it was not the place to develop a different protocol. Thus, the IEEE 802.12 committee was formed and standardized 100BaseVG.
100VG-AnyLAN vs. Fast Ethernet.
Multiplexing.
Instead of following the Fast Ethernet standard for twisted pair cabling by using only 2 pairs of wires, 100VG-AnyLAN used all four pairs in either Category 3 or Category 5 twisted pair cable. The design goals were to avoid the radio frequency radiation emitted at the higher frequencies required by Fast Ethernet and to leverage existing wiring installations of Category 3 cabling that most organizations had recently installed to support 10 megabit twisted-pair Ethernet. This had the additional advantage of being less susceptible to external sources of RF interference such as other network cables, fluorescent lights, and high power lines. They multiplexed the signal across all 8 wires thereby lowering the frequency and making it more robust. This presented a problem with early installations that borrowed one unused twisted pair for telephone traffic but those installations were uncommon. 
Deterministic.
When Ethernet became Fast Ethernet, it continued to use the Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) mechanism to manage traffic on the network cable. 100VG took advantage of the token passing concept that made ARCNET and Token Ring popular in order to provide consistent performance no matter how large the network became. It removed the token passing responsibility from the wiring and network nodes and placed it internal to the 100VG-AnyLAN hubs. These hubs contained the rotating token that never left the hub itself. When a node wanted to transmit data, it would raise a bit on its hub port connection that indicating to the hub that it was ready. As the token passed by a ready hub port, it would then open up traffic to that node. Because the token stayed within the hub, it did not have to traverse long cables going to every node as in ARCNET and Token Ring therefore becoming faster than those other deterministic networking standards and being less susceptible to cabling problems, network card failures, and line interference. Real-life load testing showed 100VG-AnyLAN reaching 95% of its theoretical network speed instead of about 45% as in Fast Ethernet when using hubs. Fast Ethernet switches were not commonplace at first because of high cost and limited availability so, initially, 100VG had a significant performance advantage.
References.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35200" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35200" title="10BASE2">
10BASE2

10BASE2 (also known as cheapernet, thin Ethernet, thinnet, and thinwire) is a variant of Ethernet that uses thin coaxial cable (RG-58A/U or similar, as opposed to the thicker RG-8 cable used in 10BASE5 networks), terminated with BNC connectors. During the mid to late 1980s this was the dominant 10 Mbit/s Ethernet standard, but due to the immense demand for high speed networking, the low cost of Category 5 Ethernet cable, and the popularity of 802.11 wireless networks, both 10BASE2 and 10BASE5 have become increasingly obsolete, though they still exist in some locations.
Name origination.
The name "10BASE2" is derived from several characteristics of the physical medium. The "10" comes from the maximum transmission speed of 10 Mbit/s (millions of bits per second). The "BASE" stands for baseband signalling, and the "2" supposedly refers to the maximum segment length of 200 meters, though in practical use it can only run up to 185 meters. (The IEEE rounded 185 up to 200 to come up with the name 10BASE2, for consistency with the general standard).
Network design.
10BASE2 coax cables have a maximum length of 185 meters (607 ft). The maximum practical number of nodes that can be connected to a 10BASE2 segment is limited to 30. In a 10BASE2 network, each segment of cable is connected to the transceiver (which is usually built into the network adaptor) using a BNC T-connector, with one segment connected to each female connector of the T. The T-connector must be plugged directly into the network adaptor with no cable in between.
As is the case with most other high-speed buses, Ethernet segments have to be terminated with a resistor at each end. Each end of the cable has a 50 ohm (Ω) resistor attached. Typically this resistor is built into a male BNC and attached to the last device on the bus. This is most commonly connected directly to the T-connector on a workstation though it does not technically have to be. A few devices such as Digital's DEMPR and DESPR had a built-in terminator and so could only be used at one physical end of the cable run. If termination is missing, or if there is a break in the cable, the AC signal on the bus is reflected, rather than dissipated, when it reaches the end. This reflected signal is indistinguishable from a collision, and so no communication would be able to take place.
Some terminators have a metallic chain attached to them for grounding purposes, however many people never understood how to properly ground cabling and thus grounded the terminators at both ends rather than just one end. This caused many of the grounding loop problems during that era which caused network outages and/or data corruption when swells of electricity traversed the coaxial cabling's outer shield on its path to the ground with the least resistance.
When wiring a 10BASE2 network, special care has to be taken to ensure that cables are properly connected to all T-connectors, and appropriate terminators are installed. One, and only one, terminator must be connected to ground via a ground wire. Bad contacts or shorts are especially difficult to diagnose, though a time-domain reflectometer will find most problems quickly. A failure at any point of the network cabling tends to prevent all communications. For this reason, 10BASE2 networks could be difficult to maintain and were often replaced by 10BASE-T networks, which (provided category 5 cable or better was used) also provided a good upgrade path to 100BASE-TX. An alternative, more reliable connection was established by the introduction of EAD-sockets.
Comparisons to 10BASE-T.
10BASE2 networks cannot generally be extended without breaking service temporarily for existing users and the presence of many joints in the cable also makes them very vulnerable to accidental or malicious disruption. There were proprietary wallport/cable systems that claimed to avoid these problems (e.g. "SaferTap") but these never became widespread, possibly due to a lack of standardization.
10BASE2 systems do have a number of advantages over 10BASE-T. They do not need the 10BASE-T hub, so the hardware cost is very low, and wiring can be particularly easy since only a single wire run is needed, which can be sourced from the nearest computer. These characteristics mean that 10BASE2 is ideal for a small network of two or three machines, perhaps in a home where easily concealed wiring may be an advantage. For a larger complex office network the difficulties of tracing poor connections make it impractical. Unfortunately for 10BASE2, by the time multiple home computer networks became common, the format had already been practically superseded. It is becoming very difficult to find 10BASE2-compatible network cards as distinct pieces of equipment, and integrated LAN controllers on motherboards don't have the connector, although the underlying logic may still be present.
References.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35201" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35201" title="10BASE5">
10BASE5

10BASE5 (also known as thick ethernet or thicknet) was the original commercially available variant of Ethernet.
For its physical layer it used cable similar to RG-8/U coaxial cable but with extra braided shielding. This is a stiff, 0.375 in diameter cable with an impedance of 50 ohms (Ω), a solid center conductor, a foam insulating filler, a shielding braid, and an outer jacket. The outer sheath was often yellow-to-orange/brown foam fluorinated ethylene propylene (for fire resistance) so it often is called "yellow cable", "orange hose", or sometimes humorously "frozen yellow garden hose".
10BASE5 has been superseded by much cheaper more convenient alternatives: first by 10BASE2 based on a thinner coaxial cable, and then once Ethernet over twisted pair was developed, by 10BASE-T and its successors 100BASE-TX and 1000BASE-T.
Name origination.
The name "10BASE5" is derived from several characteristics of the physical medium. The "10" refers to its transmission speed of 10 Mbit/s. The "BASE" is short for baseband signalling as opposed to broadband, and the "5" stands for the maximum segment length of 500 m. 
Network design.
10BASE5 coaxial cables had a maximum length of 500 meters (1,640 ft). The maximum number of nodes that can be connected to a 10BASE5 segment is 100. 
Transceivers may be installed only at precise 2.5-metre intervals. This distance was chosen to "not" correspond to the wavelength of the signal; this ensures that the reflections from multiple taps are not in phase. These suitable points are marked on the cable with black bands. The cable must be one linear run; T-connections are not allowed.
As is the case with most other high-speed buses, segments must be terminated with a resistor at each end. For coaxial-cable-based Ethernet, each end of the cable has a 50 ohm (Ω) resistor attached. Typically this resistor is built into a male N connector and attached to the end of the cable just past the last device. If termination is missing, or if there is a break in the cable, the AC signal on the bus is reflected, rather than dissipated when it reaches the end. This reflected signal is indistinguishable from a collision, and so no communication is possible.
Transceivers can be connected to cable segments with N connectors, or via a "vampire tap", which allows new nodes to be added while existing connections are live. A vampire tap clamps onto the cable, forcing a spike to pierce through the outer shielding to contact the inner conductor while other spikes bite into the outer braided shield. Care must be taken to keep the outer shield from touching the spike; installation kits include a "coring tool" to drill through the outer layers and a "braid pick" to clear stray pieces of the outer shield.
Disadvantages.
Adding new stations to network was complicated by the need to accurately pierce the cable. The cable was stiff and difficult to bend around corners. One improper connection could take down the whole network and finding the source of the trouble was difficult.
References.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35202" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35202" title="1641">
1641

Year 1641 (MDCXLI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35203" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35203" title="Ethernet over twisted pair">
Ethernet over twisted pair

Ethernet over twisted pair technologies use twisted-pair cables for the physical layer of an Ethernet computer network.
Early Ethernet cabling had generally been based on various grades of coaxial cable, but in 1984, StarLAN showed the potential of simple "unshielded" twisted pair by using Cat3 cable—the same simple cable used for telephone systems. This led to the development of 10BASE-T and its successors 100BASE-TX and 1000BASE-T, supporting speeds of 10, 100 and 1000 Mbit/s respectively. Often the higher-speed implementations support the lower-speed standards making it possible to mix different generations of equipment; with the inclusive capability designated 10/100 or 10/100/1000 for connections that support such combinations.:123
All these three standards define both full-duplex and half-duplex communication. However, half-duplex operation for gigabit speed isn't supported by any existing hardware. The higher speed 10GBASE-T running at 10 Gbit/s, consequently defines only full duplex point-to-point links which are generally connected by network switches, and doesn't support the traditional shared-medium CSMA/CD operation.
All these standards use 8P8C connectors, and the cables from Cat3 to Cat7 have four pairs of wires; though 10BASE-T and 100BASE-TX only require two of the pairs.
A 40GBASE-T standard, transporting 40 Gbit/s over up to 30 m Cat.8 cable is being defined as P802.3bq.
History.
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards association ratified several versions of the technology. The first two early designs were StarLAN, standardized in 1986, at one megabit per second,
and LattisNet, developed in January 1987, at 10 megabit per second.
Both were developed before the 10BASE-T standard (published in 1990 as IEEE 802.3i) and used different signalling, so they were not directly compatible with it.
In 1988 AT&T released StarLAN 10, named for working at 10 Mbit/s. The StarLAN 10 signalling was used as the basis of 10BASE-T, with the addition of "link beat" to quickly indicate connection status. (A number of network interface cards at the time could work with either StarLAN 10 or 10BASE-T, by switching link beat on or off.)
Using twisted pair cabling, in a star topology, for Ethernet addressed several weaknesses of the previous standards:
Naming.
The common names for the standards derive from aspects of the physical media. The leading number ("10" in 10BASE-T) refers to the transmission speed in Mbit/s. "BASE" denotes that baseband transmission is used. The T designates twisted pair cable, where the pair of wires for each signal is twisted together to reduce radio frequency interference and crosstalk between pairs. Where there are several standards for the same transmission speed, they are distinguished by a letter or digit following the T, such as "TX".
Cabling.
Twisted-pair Ethernet standards are such that the majority of cables can be wired "straight-through" (pin 1 to pin 1, pin 2 to pin 2 and so on), but others may need to be wired in the "crossover" form (receive to transmit and transmit to receive).
It is conventional to wire cables for 10- or 100-Mbit/s Ethernet to either the T568A or T568B standards. Since these standards differ only in that they swap the positions of the two pairs used for transmitting and receiving (TX/RX), a cable with T568A wiring at one end and T568B wiring at the other is referred to as a crossover cable. The terms used in the explanations of the 568 standards, tip and ring, refer to older communication technologies, and equate to the positive and negative parts of the connections.
A 10BASE-T or 100BASE-TX node such as a PC uses a connector wiring called medium dependent interfaces (MDI), transmitting on pin 1 and 2 and receiving on pin 3 and 6 to a network device. An infrastructure node (a hub, switch, or router) accordingly uses a connector wiring called MDI-X, transmitting on pin 3 and 6 and receiving on pin 1 and 2. These ports are connected using a "straight-through" cable, so each transmitter talks to the receiver on the other side.
Nodes can have two types of ports, MDI (Uplink port) or MDI-X (Regular Port, 'X' for internal crossover). Hubs and switches have regular ports. Routers, servers and end hosts (e.g. Personal Computer) have uplink ports. When two nodes having the same type of ports need to be connected, a crossover cable is often required at speeds of 10 or 100 Mbit/s, else connecting nodes having different type of ports (i.e. MDI to MDI-X and vice verse) requires straight-through cable. Thus connecting an end host to a hub or switch requires a straight-through cable. On switches/hubs sometimes a button is provided to allow a port to act as either a normal (regular) or an uplink port, i.e. using MDI-X or MDI pinout respectively.
Many modern Ethernet host adapters can automatically detect another computer connected with a straight-through cable and then automatically introduce the required crossover, if needed; if neither of the adapters has this capability, then a crossover cable is required. Most newer switches have automatic crossover ("auto MDI-X" or "auto-uplink") on all ports, eliminating the uplink port and the MDI/MDI-X switch, and allowing all connections to be made with straight-through cables. If both devices being connected support 1000BASE-T according to the standards, they will connect regardless of the cable being used or how it is wired.
A 10BASE-T transmitter sends two differential voltages, +2.5 V or −2.5 V.
100BASE-TX follows the same wiring patterns as 10BASE-T, but is more sensitive to wire quality and length, due to the higher bit rates.
A 100BASE-TX transmitter sends three differential voltages, +1 V, 0 V, or −1 V.
1000BASE-T uses all four pairs bi-directionally and the standard includes auto MDI-X; however, implementation is optional. With the way that 1000BASE-T implements signaling, how the cable is wired is immaterial in actual usage. The standard on copper twisted pair is IEEE 802.3ab for Cat 5e UTP, or 4D-PAM5; four dimensions using PAM (pulse amplitude modulation) with five voltages, −2 V, −1 V, 0 V, +1 V, and +2 V While +2 V to −2 V voltage may appear at the pins of the line driver, the voltage on the cable is nominally +1 V, +0.5 V, 0 V, −0.5 V and −1 V.
100BASE-TX and 1000BASE-T were both designed to require a minimum of Category 5 cable and also specify a maximum cable length of 100 meters. Category 5 cable has since been deprecated and new installations use Category 5e.
Unlike earlier Ethernet standards using broadband and coaxial cable, such as 10BASE5 (thicknet) and 10BASE2 (thinnet), 10BASE-T does not specify the exact type of wiring to be used, but instead specifies certain characteristics that a cable must meet. This was done in anticipation of using 10BASE-T in existing twisted-pair wiring systems that may not conform to any specified wiring standard. Some of the specified characteristics are attenuation, characteristic impedance, timing jitter, propagation delay, and several types of noise. Cable testers are widely available to check these parameters to determine if a cable can be used with 10BASE-T. These characteristics are expected to be met by 100 meters of 24-gauge unshielded twisted-pair cable. However, with high quality cabling, cable runs of 150 meters or longer are often obtained and are considered viable by most technicians familiar with the 10BASE-T specification.
Shared cable.
10BASE-T and 100BASE-TX only require two pairs (pins 1-2, 3-6) to operate. Since Category 5 cable has four pairs, it is possible, but not necessarily standards compliant, to use the spare pairs (pins 4–5, 7–8) in 10- and 100-Mbit/s configurations. The spare pairs may be used for Power over Ethernet (PoE); or two phone lines; or a second 10BASE-T or 100BASE-TX connection. In practice, great care must be taken to separate these pairs as most 10/100-Mbit/s hubs, switches, and PCs electrically terminate the unused pins. Moreover, 1000BASE-T requires all four pairs to operate.
Autonegotiation and duplex mismatch.
Many different modes of operations (10BASE-T half duplex, 10BASE-T full duplex, 100BASE-TX half duplex, ...) exist for Ethernet over twisted pair, and most network adapters are capable of different modes of operation. 1000BASE-T requires autonegotiation to be on in order to operate.
When two linked interfaces are set to different duplex modes, the effect of this duplex mismatch is a network that functions much more slowly than its nominal speed. Duplex mismatch may be inadvertently caused when an administrator configures an interface to a fixed mode (e.g. 100 Mbit/s full duplex) and fails to configure the remote interface, leaving it set to autonegotiate. Then, when the autonegotiation process fails, half duplex is assumed by the autonegotiating side of the link.

</doc>
<doc id="35204" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35204" title="1410">
1410

Year 1410 (MCDX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35205" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35205" title="13">
13

Year 13 (XIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silius and Plancus (or, less frequently, year 766 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 13 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35206" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35206" title="15">
15

Year 15 (XV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 768 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 15 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35207" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35207" title="16">
16

Year 16 (XVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Taurus and Libo (or, less frequently, year 769 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 16 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35208" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35208" title="17">
17

Year 17 (XVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Flaccus and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 770 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 17 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35209" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35209" title="18">
18

Year 18 (XVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Caesar (or, less frequently, year 771 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 18 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
India.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35210" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35210" title="20">
20

Year 20 (XX) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcus Valerius Messalla Barbatus and Cotta (or, less frequently, year 773 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 20 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35211" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35211" title="21">
21

Year 21 (XXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Caesar (or, less frequently, year 774 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 21 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>
Deaths.
Discovery of Ameus and Romulus

</doc>
<doc id="35212" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35212" title="22">
22

Year 22 (XXII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Agrippa and Galba (or, less frequently, year 775 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 22 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35213" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35213" title="23">
23

Year 23 (XXIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pollio and Vetus (or, less frequently, year 776 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 23 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35214" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35214" title="24">
24

Year 24 (XXIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cethegus and Varro (or, less frequently, year 777 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 24 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35215" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35215" title="27">
27

Year 27 (XXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Piso and Frugi (or, less frequently, year 780 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 27 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35216" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35216" title="28">
28

Year 28 (XXVIII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silanus and Nerva (or, less frequently, year 781 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 28 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35217" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35217" title="29">
29

Year 29 (XXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Geminus and Geminus (or, less frequently, year 782 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 29 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35218" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35218" title="30">
30

Year 30 (XXX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vinicius and Longinus (or, less frequently, year 783 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 30 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35219" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35219" title="16550 UART">
16550 UART

 The 16550 UART (universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter) is an integrated circuit designed for implementing the interface for serial communications. It is frequently used to implement the serial port for IBM PC compatible personal computers, where it is often connected to an RS-232 interface for modems, serial mice, printers, and similar peripherals. 
The part was originally made by National Semiconductor. Similarly numbered devices, with varying levels of compatibility with the original National Semiconductor part, are made by other manufacturers. A UART function that is register-compatible with the 16550 is usually a feature of multifunction I/O cards for IBM PC-compatible computers, and may be integrated on the motherboard of other compatible computers. 
Replacement of the factory-installed 8250 UART was a common upgrade for owners of IBM PC, XT, and compatible computers when high-speed modems became available. At speeds higher than 9600 baud, owners discovered that the serial ports of the computers were not able to handle a continuous flow of data without losing characters. Exchange of the 8250 (having only a one-byte received data buffer) with a 16550, and occasionally patching or setting system software to be aware of the FIFO feature of the new chip, improved the reliability and stability of high-speed connections. 
Features.
Main features of the 16550 include:
Both the computer hardware and software interface of the 16550 are backward compatible with the earlier 8250 UART and 16450 UART. The current version (since 1995) by National Semiconductor is called the 16550D. 
The 16550 FIFO.
 One drawback of the earlier 8250 UARTs and 16450 UARTs was that interrupts were generated for each byte received. This generated high rates of interrupts as transfer speeds increased. More critically, with only a 1-byte buffer there is a genuine risk that a received byte will be overwritten if interrupt service delays occur. To overcome these shortcomings, the 16550 series UARTs incorporated a 16-byte FIFO buffer with a programmable interrupt trigger of 1, 4, 8, or 14 bytes.
The original 16550 had a bug that prevented this FIFO from being used. National Semiconductor later released the 16550A which corrected this issue. Not all manufacturers adopted this nomenclature, however, continuing to refer to the fixed chip as a 16550.
According to another source, the FIFO issue was only corrected in the 16550AF model, with the A model still being buggy. (The C and CF models are okay too, according to this source.) The 16550AFN model added DMA transfers.
The 16550 also incorporates a transmit FIFO, though this feature is less critical as delays in interrupt service would only result in sub-optimal transmission speeds and not actual data loss.

</doc>
<doc id="35220" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35220" title="1643">
1643

Year 1643 (MDCXLIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35221" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35221" title="FTZ 1 TR 6">
FTZ 1 TR 6

FTZ 1 TR 6 (or 1 TR 6) is the standard for the obsolete German national digital signalling protocol (D channel protocol) used for the ISDN. It has been superseded by DSS1 but is still in use on some lines and private exchanges.
1 TR 6 did not support multiple subscriber numbers but featured an "Endgeräteauswahlziffer" ("EAZ", German "user device selection digit"). ISDN subscribers would get a sequence of 10 subsequent subscriber numbers, the last digit of which being the EAZ. The EAZ "0" was used for "global calls" to all connected devices.
1 TR 6 also offered "semipermanent connections", which were (comparatively cheap) leased lines that could be temporarily disabled to use the B channel for other purposes.
It is said that the "TR" simply stands for "technische Richtlinie" (technical guideline).

</doc>
<doc id="35222" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35222" title="20-GATE">
20-GATE

20-Gate is an algebraic programming language developed at Carnegie Mellon University around 1965, for the Bendix G-20 computer.
External links.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35224" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35224" title="NS320xx">
NS320xx

The 320xx or NS32000 was a series of microprocessors from National Semiconductor. They were likely the first 32-bit general-purpose microprocessors on the market, but due to a number of factors never managed to become a major player. The 320xx series was also used as the basis of the Swordfish microcontroller. It was replaced by the CompactRISC architecture in mid-1990.
Architecture.
The processors had 8 general-purpose 32-bit registers, plus a series of special-purpose registers:
(Additional system registers not listed).
The instruction set was very much in the CISC model, with 2-operand instructions, memory-to-memory operations, flexible addressing modes, and variable-length byte-aligned instruction encoding. Addressing modes could involve up to two displacements and two memory indirections per operand as well as scaled indexing, making the longest conceivable instruction 23 bytes. The actual number of instructions was much lower than that of contemporary RISC processors.
Unlike some other processors, autoincrement of the base register was not provided; the only exception was a "top of stack" addressing mode that would pop sources and push destinations. Uniquely, the size of the displacement was encoded in its most significant bits: 0, 10 and 11 preceded 7-, 14- and 30-bit signed displacements. (Although the processors were otherwise consistently little-endian, displacements in the instruction stream were stored in big-endian order).
General-purpose operands were specified using a 5-bit field. To this could be added an index byte (specifying the index register and 5-bit base address), and up to 2 variable-length displacements per operand.
Beginnings: the 32016 and 32032.
The original 32016 had a 16-bit external databus, a 24-bit external address bus, and a full 32-bit instruction set. It also included a coprocessor interface, allowing coprocessors such as FPUs and MMUs to be attached as peers to the main processor. The MMU was based on demand paging Virtual Memory, which was the most unique feature compared to the segmented memory approach used by competition, and has become the standard for how microprocessors are designed today. The architecture supported an instruction restart mechanism on a page fault, which was much cleaner than the Motorola approach to dump the internal status on a page fault, which had to be read back, before the instruction was continued.
Again, the Series 32000 approach has become the standard behavior.
The first chip in the series was originally called 16032, later renamed 32016 to emphasize its 32-bit internals. It became available in 1982, and may have been the first 32-bit chip to reach mass production and sale (at least according to National Semiconductor marketing). The MC68000 was released earlier with an instruction set allowing 32-bit operations, but the internal implementation was 16-bit, so 32-bit instructions would take twice the time of a 16-bit instruction.
The 16032 would do 32-bit instructions as fast as 16-bit instructions.
It took a long time to get the chip into production, and in 1984 the errata list still contained items specifying uncontrollable conditions that would result in the processor coming to a halt, forcing a reset.
NSC changed design methodology to make it possible to get the part into production
and a design system based on the language "Z" was co-developed with the University of Tel-Aviv, close to the "NSC" design centre in Herzlya, Israel. The "Z" language was similar to today's Verilog and VHDL, but had a Pascal-like syntax and was optimized for two-phase clock designs.
The instruction set resembled, but not compatible with, that of the popular DEC VAX minicomputer. It was extremely complex but mostly regular, with a large set of addressing modes. The 32016 was by some considered to be very similar to the Motorola 68000, which also used 32-bit internals with a 16-bit data bus and 24-bit address bus. This was rejected by NSC employees; one of the key marketing phrases of the time was "Elegance is Everything", comparing the highly orthogonal Series 32000 to the "kludge". One key difference was the Motorola's use of address register and data registers, with instructions only working on either address or data registers. The Series 32000 had general-purpose registers.
The original intention of National Semiconductor was to design a VAX-11 on a chip, and National took DEC to court in California (home of NSC) to ensure the legality of the design. When DEC managed to get the lawsuit moved to Massachusetts (home of DEC), the lawsuit was dropped and the Series 32000 architecture was developed.
The 32032 was introduced in 1984. It was almost completely compatible, but featured a 32-bit data bus (although keeping the 24-bit address bus) for somewhat faster performance. The 32032 was also renamed at the same time as the
16032, and the new name was 32032. There was also a 32008, a 32016 with a data bus cut down to 8-bits wide for low-cost applications. It was philosophically similar to the MC68008, and equally unpopular. Both these chips were designed to fit into the original IBM PC, but were rejected in favour of Intel's 8088.
National Semiconductor also produced related support chips like Floating Point Units (FPUs) NS32081, Memory Management Units (MMUs) NS32082, Direct Memory Access (DMA) NS32203 and Interrupt NS32202 Controllers. With the full set plus memory chips and peripherals, it was feasible to build a 32-bit computer system capable of supporting modern multi-tasking operating systems, something that had previously been possible only on expensive minicomputers and mainframes.
32332, 32532, Swordfish and others.
During the 1980s, successor chips called the NS32332 and NS32532 arrived, maintaining a good degree of compatibility, with much improved reliability and performance. By then the damage to reputation had been done however, and these chips were ignored by most of the market.
In 1985, National Semi introduced the NS32332, a much improved version of the 32032. From the datasheet, the enhancements include "the addition of new dedicated addressing hardware (consisting of a high speed ALU, a barrel shifter and an address register), a very efficient increased (20 bytes) instruction prefetch queue, a new system/memory bus interface/protocol, increased efficiency slave processor protocol and finally enhancements of microcode." There was also a new NS32382 MMU, NS32381 FPU and the (very rare) NS32310 interface to a Weitek FPA.
The aggregate performance boost of the NS32332 from these enhancements only made it 50 percent faster than the original NS32032, and therefore less than that of the main competitor, the MC68020.
National Semi introduced the NS32532 in early 1987. Running at 20-, 25- & 30-MHz, it was a complete redesign of the internal implementation with a five-stage pipeline, an integrated Cache/MMU and improved memory performance, making it about twice as performant as the competing MC68030 and i80386. At this stage RISC architectures were starting to make inroads, and the main competitors became the now equally dead AM29000 and MC88000, which was considered faster than the NS32532. Interestingly, there wasn't a new FPU; the NS32532 used the existing NS32381.(1) The NS32532 was the basis of one of the few fully realized "public domain" hardware projects (that is, resulting in an actual, useful machine running a real operating system, in this case Minix or NetBSD), the PC532.
The semi-mythical NS32732 (sometimes called NS32764), originally envisioned as the high-performance successor to the NS32532. This program never came to the market, but a derivative called Swordfish aimed at embedded systems arrived in about 1990. Swordfish had an integrated floating point unit, timers, DMA controllers and other peripherals not normally available in microprocessors. It had a 64-bit databus and was internally overclocked from 25 to 50 MHz. The chief architect of the Swordfish was Donald Alpert, who went on to manage the architectural team designing the Pentium. The Pentium internal microarchitecture is similar to the preceding Swordfish. The focus of Swordfish was high-end Postscript laserprinters, and performance was exceptional at the time. Competing solutions would produce one new page per minute, but the Swordfish demo would happily print out sixteen pages per minute supported by the laser-engine mechanics, and then on each page print out how much time it was idling, waiting for the engine to complete. The Swordfish die was huge, and it was eventually decided to drop the project altogether, and the product never went into production. The lessons from the Swordfish were used for the CompactRISC designs. In the beginning, there were both a CompactRISC-32 and a CompactRISC-16, designed using "Z". National never brought a chip to the market with the CompactRISC-32 core. National's Research department worked with the University of Michigan to develop the first synthesizable Verilog Model, and Verilog was used from the CR16C and onwards.
Versions of the older NS32000 line for low cost products such as the NS32CG16, NS32CG160, NS32FV16, NS32FX161, NS32FX164 and the NS32AM160/1/3, all based on the NS302CG16 were introduced from 1987 and onwards.
These processors had some success in the laser printer and fax market, despite intense competition from AMD and Intel RISC chips. Especially the NS32CG16 should be noted. The key difference between this and the NS32C016 was the integration of the expensive TCU (Timing Control Unit) which generated the needed two-phase clock from a crystal, and the removal of the floating point coprocessor support, which freed up microcode space for the useful BitBLT instruction set, which significantly improved the performance in laser printer operations, making this 60,000 transistor chip faster than the 200,000 transistor MC68020. The NS32CG160 was the CG16 with timers and DMA peripherals, while the NS32FV/FX16x chips had extra DSP functionality on top of the CG16 BitBLT core for the Fax/Answering Machine market. They were complemented by the NS32532 based NS32GX32 later. Unlike the previous chips, there was no extra hardware. The NS32GX32 was the NS32532 without the MMU sold at an attractive price for embedded system. In the beginning, this was just a remarked chip. It is unclear if the chip was redesigned for lower-cost production.
Datasheets exist for an NS32132, apparently designed for multiprocessor systems. This was the NS32032 extended with an arbiter. The bus usage of the NS32032 was about 50 percent, owing to its very compact instruction set, or its very slow pipeline as competitors would phrase it. The NS32132 chip allowed a pair of CPUs to be connected to the same memory system, without much change of the PCB. Prototype systems were built by Diab Data AB in Sweden, but did not perform as well as the single-CPU MC68020 system designed by the same company.
Machines using the NS32000 series.
An few example machines using NS32000-series CPUs:
External links.
Datasheets
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35225" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35225" title="1521">
1521

Year 1521 (MDXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35226" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35226" title="1500s (decade)">
1500s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35227" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35227" title="1510s">
1510s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35228" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35228" title="1560s">
1560s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35229" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35229" title="1565">
1565

Year 1565 (MDLXV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35230" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35230" title="1767">
1767

Year 1767 (MDCCLXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
July–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35231" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35231" title="530s">
530s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35232" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35232" title="500s (decade)">
500s (decade)

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35233" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35233" title="510s">
510s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35234" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35234" title="520s">
520s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35235" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35235" title="540s">
540s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35236" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35236" title="550s">
550s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35237" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35237" title="560s">
560s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 
9.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35238" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35238" title="570s">
570s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35239" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35239" title="580s">
580s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35240" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35240" title="590s">
590s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35241" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35241" title="1300">
1300

Year 1300 (MCCC) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35242" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35242" title="1845">
1845

Year 1845 (MDCCCXLV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35243" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35243" title="1849">
1849

Year 1849 (MDCCCXLIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35244" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35244" title="480">
480

Year 480 (CDLXXX) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Basilius without colleague (or, less frequently, year 1233 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 480 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35245" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35245" title="490s">
490s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35246" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35246" title="480s">
480s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35247" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35247" title="1610s">
1610s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35248" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35248" title="2D computer graphics">
2D computer graphics

2D computer graphics is the computer-based generation of digital images—mostly from two-dimensional models (such as 2D geometric models, text, and digital images) and by techniques specific to them. The word may stand for the branch of computer science that comprises such techniques, or for the models themselves.
2D computer graphics are mainly used in applications that were originally developed upon traditional printing and drawing technologies, such as typography, cartography, technical drawing, advertising, etc. In those applications, the two-dimensional image is not just a representation of a real-world object, but an independent artifact with added semantic value; two-dimensional models are therefore preferred, because they give more direct control of the image than 3D computer graphics (whose approach is more akin to photography than to typography).
In many domains, such as desktop publishing, engineering, and business, a description of a document based on 2D computer graphics techniques can be much smaller than the corresponding digital image—often by a factor of 1/1000 or more. This representation is also more flexible since it can be rendered at different resolutions to suit different output devices. For these reasons, documents and illustrations are often stored or transmitted as 2D graphic files.
2D computer graphics started in the 1950s, based on vector graphics devices. These were largely supplanted by raster-based devices in the following decades. The PostScript language and the window 97 System protocol were landmark developments in the field.
2D graphics techniques.
2D graphics models may combine geometric models (also called vector graphics), digital images (also called raster graphics), text to be typeset (defined by content, font style and size, color, position, and orientation), mathematical functions and equations, and more. These components can be modified and manipulated by two-dimensional geometric transformations such as translation, rotation, scaling.
In object-oriented graphics, the image is described indirectly by an object endowed with a self-rendering method—a procedure which assigns colors to the image pixels by an arbitrary algorithm. Complex models can be built by combining simpler objects, in the paradigms of object-oriented programming.
In Euclidean geometry, a translation moves every point a constant distance in a specified direction. A translation can be described as a rigid motion: other rigid motions include rotations and reflections. A translation can also be interpreted as the addition of a constant vector to every point, or as shifting the origin of the coordinate system. A translation operator is an operator formula_1 such that formula_2
If v is a fixed vector, then the translation "T"v will work as "T"v(p) = p + v.
If "T" is a translation, then the image of a subset "A" under the function "T" is the translate of "A" by "T". The translate of "A" by "T"v is often written "A" + v.
In a Euclidean space, any translation is an isometry. The set of all translations forms the translation group "T", which is isomorphic to the space itself, and a normal subgroup of Euclidean group "E"("n" ). The quotient group of "E"("n" ) by "T" is isomorphic to the orthogonal group "O"("n" ):
Translation.
Since a translation is an affine transformation but not a linear transformation, homogeneous coordinates are normally used to represent the translation operator by a matrix and thus to make it linear. Thus we write the 3-dimensional vector w = ("w""x", "w""y", "w""z") using 4 homogeneous coordinates as w = ("w""x", "w""y", "w""z", 1).
To translate an object by a vector v, each homogeneous vector p (written in homogeneous coordinates) would need to be multiplied by this translation matrix:
As shown below, the multiplication will give the expected result:
The inverse of a translation matrix can be obtained by reversing the direction of the vector:
Similarly, the product of translation matrices is given by adding the vectors:
Because addition of vectors is commutative, multiplication of translation matrices is therefore also commutative (unlike multiplication of arbitrary matrices).
Rotation.
In linear algebra, a rotation matrix is a matrix that is used to perform a rotation in Euclidean space. For example the matrix
rotates points in the "xy"-Cartesian plane counterclockwise through an angle "θ" about the origin of the Cartesian coordinate system. To perform the rotation using a rotation matrix "R", the position of each point must be represented by a column vector v, containing the coordinates of the point. A rotated vector is obtained by using the matrix multiplication "R"v. Since matrix multiplication has no effect on the zero vector (i.e., on the coordinates of the origin), rotation matrices can only be used to describe rotations about the origin of the coordinate system.
Rotation matrices provide a simple algebraic description of such rotations, and are used extensively for computations in geometry, physics, and computer graphics. In 2-dimensional space, a rotation can be simply described by an angle "θ" of rotation, but it can be also represented by the 4 entries of a rotation matrix with 2 rows and 2 columns. In 3-dimensional space, every rotation can be interpreted as a rotation by a given angle about a single fixed axis of rotation (see Euler's rotation theorem), and hence it can be simply described by an angle and a vector with 3 entries. However, it can also be represented by the 9 entries of a rotation matrix with 3 rows and 3 columns. The notion of rotation is not commonly used in dimensions higher than 3; there is a notion of a rotational displacement, which can be represented by a matrix, but no associated single axis or angle.
Rotation matrices are square matrices, with real entries. More specifically they can be characterized as orthogonal matrices with determinant 1:
The set of all such matrices of size "n" forms a group, known as the special orthogonal group SO("n").
In two dimensions.
In two dimensions every rotation matrix has the following form:
This rotates column vectors by means of the following matrix multiplication:
So the coordinates (x',y') of the point (x,y) after rotation are:
The direction of vector rotation is counterclockwise if θ is positive (e.g. 90°), and clockwise if θ is negative (e.g. -90°).
Non-standard orientation of the coordinate system.
If a standard right-handed Cartesian coordinate system is used, with the "x" axis to the right and the "y" axis up, the rotation R("θ") is counterclockwise. If a left-handed Cartesian coordinate system is used, with "x" directed to the right but "y" directed down, R("θ") is clockwise. Such non-standard orientations are rarely used in mathematics but are common in 2D computer graphics, which often have the origin in the top left corner and the "y"-axis down the screen or page.
See below for other alternative conventions which may change the sense of the rotation produced by a rotation matrix.
Common rotations.
Particularly useful are the matrices for 90° and 180° rotations:
In Euclidean geometry, uniform scaling (isotropic scaling, homogeneous dilation, homothety) is a linear transformation that enlarges (increases) or shrinks (diminishes) objects by a scale factor that is the same in all directions. The result of uniform scaling is similar (in the geometric sense) to the original. A scale factor of 1 is normally allowed, so that congruent shapes are also classed as similar. (Some school text books specifically exclude this possibility, just as some exclude squares from being rectangles or circles from being ellipses.)
More general is scaling with a separate scale factor for each axis direction. Non-uniform scaling (anisotropic scaling, inhomogeneous dilation) is obtained when at least one of the scaling factors is different from the others; a special case is directional scaling or stretching (in one direction). Non-uniform scaling changes the shape of the object; e.g. a square may change into a rectangle, or into a parallelogram if the sides of the square are not parallel to the scaling axes (the angles between lines parallel to the axes are preserved, but not all angles).
Scaling.
A scaling can be represented by a scaling matrix. To scale an object by a vector "v" = ("vx, vy, vz"), each point "p" = ("px, py, pz") would need to be multiplied with this scaling matrix:
As shown below, the multiplication will give the expected result:
Such a scaling changes the diameter of an object by a factor between the scale factors, the area by a factor between the smallest and the largest product of two scale factors, and the volume by the product of all three.
The scaling is uniform if and only if the scaling factors are equal ("vx = vy = vz"). If all except one of the scale factors are equal to 1, we have directional scaling.
In the case where "vx = vy = vz = k", the scaling is also called an enlargement or dilation by a factor k, increasing the area by a factor of k2 and the volume by a factor of k3.
A scaling in the most general sense is any affine transformation with a diagonalizable matrix. It includes the case that the three directions of scaling are not perpendicular. It includes also the case that one or more scale factors are equal to zero (projection), and the case of one or more negative scale factors. The latter corresponds to a combination of scaling proper and a kind of reflection: along lines in a particular direction we take the reflection in the point of intersection with a plane that need not be perpendicular; therefore it is more general than ordinary reflection in the plane.
Using homogeneous coordinates.
In projective geometry, often used in computer graphics, points are represented using homogeneous coordinates. To scale an object by a vector "v" = ("vx, vy, vz"), each homogeneous coordinate vector "p" = ("px, py, pz", 1) would need to be multiplied with this projective transformation matrix:
As shown below, the multiplication will give the expected result:
Since the last component of a homogeneous coordinate can be viewed as the denominator of the other three components, a uniform scaling by a common factor "s" (uniform scaling) can be accomplished by using this scaling matrix:
For each vector "p" = ("px, py, pz", 1) we would have
which would be homogenized to
Direct painting.
A convenient way to create a complex image is to start with a blank "canvas" raster map (an array of pixels, also known as a bitmap) filled with some uniform background color and then "draw", "paint" or "paste" simple patches of color onto it, in an appropriate order. In particular the canvas may be the frame buffer for a computer display.
Some programs will set the pixel colors directly, but most will rely on some 2D graphics library and/or the machine's graphics card, which usually implement the following operations:
Extended color models.
Text, shapes and lines are rendered with a client-specified color. Many libraries and cards provide color gradients, which are handy for the generation of smoothly-varying backgrounds, shadow effects, etc. (See also Gouraud shading). The pixel colors can also be taken from a texture, e.g. a digital image (thus emulating rub-on screentones and the fabled "checker paint" which used to be available only in cartoons).
Painting a pixel with a given color usually replaces its previous color. However, many systems support painting with transparent and translucent colors, which only modify the previous pixel values. 
The two colors may also be combined in more complex ways, e.g. by computing their bitwise exclusive or. This technique is known as inverting color or color inversion, and is often used in graphical user interfaces for highlighting, rubber-band drawing, and other volatile painting—since re-painting the same shapes with the same color will restore the original pixel values. 
Layers.
The models used in 2D computer graphics usually do not provide for three-dimensional shapes, or three-dimensional optical phenomena such as lighting, shadows, reflection, refraction, etc. However, they usually can model multiple "layers" (conceptually of ink, paper, or film; opaque, translucent, or transparent—stacked in a specific order. The ordering is usually defined by a single number (the layer's "depth", or distance from the viewer). 
Layered models are sometimes called "2½-D computer graphics". They make it possible to mimic traditional drafting and printing techniques based on film and paper, such as cutting and pasting; and allow the user to edit any layer without affecting the others. For these reasons, they are used in most graphics editors. Layered models also allow better spatial anti-aliasing of complex drawings and provide a sound model for certain techniques such as mitered joints and the even-odd rule.
Layered models are also used to allow the user to suppress unwanted information when viewing or printing a document, e.g. roads and/or railways from a map, certain process layers from an integrated circuit diagram, or hand annotations from a business letter.
In a layer-based model, the target image is produced by "painting" or "pasting" each layer, in order of decreasing depth, on the virtual canvas. Conceptually, each layer is first rendered on its own, yielding a digital image with the desired resolution which is then painted over the canvas, pixel by pixel. Fully transparent parts of a layer need not be rendered, of course. The rendering and painting may be done in parallel, i.e., each layer pixel may be painted on the canvas as soon as it is produced by the rendering procedure. 
Layers that consist of complex geometric objects (such as text or polylines) may be broken down into simpler elements (characters or line segments, respectively), which are then painted as separate layers, in some order. However, this solution may create undesirable aliasing artifacts wherever two elements overlap the same pixel.
See also Portable Document Format#Layers.
2D graphics hardware.
Modern computer graphics card displays almost overwhelmingly use raster techniques, dividing the screen into a rectangular grid of pixels, due to the relatively low cost of raster-based video hardware as compared with vector graphic hardware. Most graphic hardware has internal support for blitting operations and/or sprite drawing. A co-processor dedicated to blitting is known as a "Blitter chip".
Classic 2D graphics chips and graphics processing units of the late 1970s to 1980s, used in 8-bit to early 16-bit, arcade games, video game consoles, and home computers, include:
2D graphics software.
Many graphical user interfaces (GUIs), including Mac OS, Microsoft Windows, or the X Window System, are primarily based on 2D graphical concepts. Such software provides a visual environment for interacting with the computer, and commonly includes some form of window manager to aid the user in conceptually distinguishing between different applications. 
The user interface within individual software applications is typically 2D in nature as well, due in part to the fact that most common input devices, such as the mouse, are constrained to two dimensions of movement.
2D graphics are very important in the control peripherals such as printers, plotters, sheet cutting machines, etc. They were also used in most early video games; and are still used for card and board games such as solitaire, chess, mahjongg, etc. 
2D graphics editors or "drawing programs" are application-level software for the creation of images, diagrams and illustrations by direct manipulation (through the mouse, graphics tablet, or similar device) of 2D computer graphics primitives. These editors generally provide geometric primitives as well as digital images; and some even support procedural models. The illustration is usually represented internally as a layered model, often with a hierarchical structure to make editing more convenient. These editors generally output graphics files where the layers and primitives are separately preserved in their original form. MacDraw, introduced in 1984 with the Macintosh line of computers, was an early example of this class; recent examples are the commercial products Adobe Illustrator and CorelDRAW, and the free editors such as xfig or Inkscape. There are also many 2D graphics editors specialized for certain types of drawings such as electrical, electronic and VLSI diagrams, topographic maps, computer fonts, etc.
Image editors are specialized for the manipulation of digital images, mainly by means of free-hand drawing/painting and signal processing operations. They typically use a direct-painting paradigm, where the user controls virtual pens, brushes, and other free-hand artistic instruments to apply paint to a virtual canvas. Some image editors support a multiple-layer model; however, in order to support signal-processing operations like blurring each layer is normally represented as a digital image. Therefore, any geometric primitives that are provided by the editor are immediately converted to pixels and painted onto the canvas. The name "raster graphics editor" is sometimes used to contrast this approach to that of general editors which also handle "vector graphics". One of the first popular image editors was Apple's MacPaint, companion to MacDraw. Modern examples are the free GIMP editor, and the commercial products Photoshop and Paint Shop Pro. This class too includes many specialized editors — for medicine, remote sensing, digital photography, etc.
Developmental animation.
With the resurgence:8 of 2D animation, free and proprietary software packages have become widely available for amateurs and professional animators. The principal issue with 2D animation is labor requirements. With software like RETAS and Adobe After Effects, coloring and compositing can be done in less time.
Various approaches have been developed:38 to aid and speed up the process of digital 2D animation. For example, by generating vector artwork in a tool like Adobe Flash an artist may employ software-driven automatic coloring and in-betweening.

</doc>
<doc id="35249" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35249" title="586 BC">
586 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35250" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35250" title="32">
32

Year 32 (XXXII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ahenobarbus and Camillus (or, less frequently, year 785 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 32 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35251" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35251" title="33">
33

Year 33 (XXXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in the Roman world as the Year of the Consulship of Ocella and Sulla (or, less frequently, year 786 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 33 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35252" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35252" title="34">
34

Year 34 (XXXIV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Persicus and Vitellius (or, less frequently, year 787 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 34 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35253" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35253" title="35">
35

Year 35 (XXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallus and Nonianus (or, less frequently, year 788 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 35 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35254" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35254" title="36">
36

Year 36 (XXXVI) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Allenius and Plautius (or, less frequently, year 789 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 36 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Mesoamerica.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35255" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35255" title="38">
38

Year 38 (XXXVIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Iulianus and Asprenas (or, less frequently, year 791 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 38 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35256" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35256" title="39">
39

Year 39 (XXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Corbulo (or, less frequently, year 792 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 39 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35257" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35257" title="40">
40

Year 40 (XL) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus without colleague (or, less frequently, year 793 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 40 for this year has been used since the Early Middle Ages, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35258" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35258" title="42">
42

Year 42 (XLII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Piso (or, less frequently, year 795 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 42 for this year has been used since the Early Middle Ages, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35259" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35259" title="44">
44

Year 44 (XLIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crispus and Taurus (or, less frequently, year 797 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 44 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35260" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35260" title="45">
45

Year 45 (XLV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vinicius and Sabinus (or, less frequently, year 798 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 45 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35261" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35261" title="46">
46

Year 46 (XLVI) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Asiaticus and Silanus (or, less frequently, year 799 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 46 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35262" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35262" title="47">
47

Year 47 (XLVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Vitellius (or, less frequently, year 800 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 47 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35263" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35263" title="48">
48

Year 48 (XLVIII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vitellius and Poplicola (or, less frequently, year 801 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 48 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35264" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35264" title="49">
49

Year 49 (XLIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Longus and Veranius (or, less frequently, year 802 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 49 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35265" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35265" title="50">
50

Year 50 (L) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vetus and Nerullinus (or, less frequently, year 803 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 50 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
America.
San Bartolo pyramid is completed around this time.
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35266" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35266" title="0s BC">
0s BC

0s BC is usually considered the last decade of the 1st century BC and the 1st millennium BC. However, like the 0s, the number of years in the 0s BC is not always clearly defined. Note that there is no year zero (0) in either the proleptic Gregorian calendar or Julian calendar. Hence 1 BC is followed by the year AD 1.
AD 1 is the first year of the Anno Domini era (also known as the Common Era). In 525 (the consulship of Probus Junior Flavius Probus), a Christian monk named Dionysius Exiguus stated that the incarnation of Jesus occurred 525 years earlier. Whether Dionysius regarded "incarnation" as Jesus' birth or conception, and whether Dionysius placed it in 1 BC or AD 1 are debated by modern scholars. Nevertheless, these same scholars believe Jesus was actually born a few years earlier, during this decade.
This article concerns the period 9 BC – 1 BC, the last nine years before the Anno Domini era, not the last ten years.

</doc>
<doc id="35267" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35267" title="51">
51

Year 51 (LI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Scipio (or, less frequently, year 804 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 51 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35268" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35268" title="52">
52

Year 52 (LII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sulla and Otho (or, less frequently, year 805 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 52 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35269" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35269" title="53">
53

Year 53 (LIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silanus and Antonius (or, less frequently, year 806 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 53 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35270" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35270" title="55">
55

Year 55 (LV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Vetus (or, less frequently, year 808 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 55 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35271" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35271" title="56">
56

Year 56 (LVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Saturninus and Scipio (or, less frequently, year 809 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 56 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35272" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35272" title="57">
57

Year 57 (LVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Piso (or, less frequently, year 810 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 57 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35273" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35273" title="58">
58

Year 58 (LVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Messalla (or, less frequently, year 811 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 58 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35274" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35274" title="59">
59

Year 59 (LIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Capito of Apronianus and Capito (or, less frequently, year 812 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 59 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35275" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35275" title="60">
60

Year 60 (LX) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Lentulus (or, less frequently, year 813 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 60 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
The year 60 is the first identifiable year for which a date is cited complete with day of the week, i.e. 6 February 60, identified as a "Sunday" (as "viii idus Februarius dies solis" "eighth day before the ides of February, day of the Sun") in a Pompeiian grafitto. According to the currently-used Julian calendar, 6 February 60 was a Wednesday ("dies Mercurii", "day of Mercury"). This is explained by the existence of two conventions of naming days of the weeks based on the planetary hours system, 6 February was a "Sunday" based on the sunset naming convention, and a "Wednesday" based on the sunrise naming convention.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Art and science.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35276" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35276" title="61">
61

Year 61 (LXI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Turpilianus and Caesennius (or, less frequently, year 814 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 61 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35277" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35277" title="62">
62

Year 62 (LXII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Afinius (or, less frequently, year 815 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 62 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35278" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35278" title="63">
63

Year 63 (LXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Regulus and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 816 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 63 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35279" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35279" title="64">
64

Year 64 (LXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Bassus and Crassus (or, less frequently, year 817 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 64 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35280" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35280" title="65">
65

Year 65 (LXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Nerva and Vestinus (or, less frequently, year 818 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 65 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35281" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35281" title="66">
66

Year 66 (LXVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Telesinus and Paullinus (or, less frequently, year 819 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 66 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35282" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35282" title="67">
67

Year 67 (LXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rufus and Capito (or, less frequently, year 820 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 67 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35283" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35283" title="71">
71

Year 71 (LXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Nerva (or, less frequently, year 824 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 71 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35284" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35284" title="72">
72

Year 72 (LXXII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Vespasianus (or, less frequently, year 825 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 72 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35285" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35285" title="73">
73

Year 73 (LXXIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Domitianus and Catullus (or, less frequently, year 826 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 73 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35286" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35286" title="74">
74

Year 74 (LXXIV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Titus (third time) and Vespasianus (fifth time) (or, less frequently, year 827 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 74 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35287" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35287" title="75">
75

Year 75 (LXXV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Vespasianus (or, less frequently, year 828 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 75 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35288" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35288" title="76">
76

Year 76 (LXXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Vespasianus (or, less frequently, year 829 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 76 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35289" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35289" title="77">
77

Year 77 (LXXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Vespasianus (or, less frequently, year 830 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 77 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35290" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35290" title="78">
78

Year 78 (LXXVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Novius and Commodus (or, less frequently, year 831 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 78 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Philosophy.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35291" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35291" title="80">
80

Year 80 (LXXX) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Domitianus (or, less frequently, year 833 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 80 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35292" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35292" title="82">
82

Year 82 (LXXXII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Sabinus (or, less frequently, year 835 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 82 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35293" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35293" title="83">
83

Year 83 (LXXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 836 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 83 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35294" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35294" title="84">
84

Year 84 (LXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Sabinus (or, less frequently, year 837 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 84 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35295" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35295" title="85">
85

Year 85 (LXXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Fulvus (or, less frequently, year 838 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 85 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35296" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35296" title="86">
86

Year 86 (LXXXVI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Petronianus (or, less frequently, year 839 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 86 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35297" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35297" title="87">
87

Year 87 (LXXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Saturninus (or, less frequently, year 840 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 87 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35298" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35298" title="88">
88

Year 88 (LXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 841 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 88 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35299" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35299" title="89">
89

Year 89 (LXXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Fulvus and Atratinus (or, less frequently, year 842 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 89 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35300" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35300" title="90">
90

Year 90 (XC) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Nerva (or, less frequently, year 843 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 90 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35301" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35301" title="91">
91

Year 91 (XCI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Glabrio and Traianus (or, less frequently, year 844 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 91 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35302" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35302" title="92">
92

Year 92 (XCII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Saturninus (or, less frequently, year 845 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 92 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35303" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35303" title="93">
93

Year 93 (XCIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pompeius and Priscinus (or, less frequently, year 846 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 93 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35304" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35304" title="94">
94

Year 94 (XCIV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calpurnius and Magius (or, less frequently, year 847 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 94 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35305" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35305" title="95">
95

Year 95 (XCV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Clemens (or, less frequently, year 848 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 95 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35306" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35306" title="97">
97

Year 97 (XCVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 850 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 97 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35307" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35307" title="98">
98

Year 98 (XCVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Traianus (or, less frequently, year 851 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 98 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Commerce.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35308" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35308" title="99">
99

Year 99 (XCIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Palma and Senecio (or, less frequently, year 852 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 99 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35309" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35309" title="100">
100

Year 100 (C) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Traianus and Frontinus (or, less frequently, year 853 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 100 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35310" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35310" title="543">
543

Year 543 (DXLIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 543 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Learning.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35311" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35311" title="420s">
420s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35313" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35313" title="101">
101

Year 101 (CI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Traianus and Paetus (or, less frequently, year 854 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 101 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35314" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35314" title="431">
431

 
Year 431 (CDXXXI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Bassus and Antiochus (or, less frequently, year 1184 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 431 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35315" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35315" title="331">
331

Year 331 (CCCXXXI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Bassus and Ablabius (or, less frequently, year 1084 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 331 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35316" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35316" title="531">
531

Year 531 (DXXXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year after the Consulship of Lampadius and Probus (or, less frequently, year 1284 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 531 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35317" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35317" title="631">
631

Year 631 (DCXXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 631 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35318" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35318" title="426">
426

Year 426 (CDXXVI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Valentinianus (or, less frequently, year 1179 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 426 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35319" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35319" title="429">
429

Year 429 (CDXXIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Florentius and Dionysius (or, less frequently, year 1182 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 429 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35320" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35320" title="450s">
450s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35321" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35321" title="453">
453

Year 453 (CDLIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Opilio and Vincomalus (or, less frequently, year 1206 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 453 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35322" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35322" title="452">
452

Year 452 (CDLII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Herculanus and Sporacius (or, less frequently, year 1205 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 452 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35323" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35323" title="451">
451

Year 451 (CDLI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcianus and Adelfius (or, less frequently, year 1204 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 451 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35324" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35324" title="804">
804

Year 804 (DCCCIV) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35325" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35325" title="1252">
1252

Year 1252 (MCCLII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35326" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35326" title="811">
811

Year 811 (DCCCXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Byzantine Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35327" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35327" title="1284">
1284

Year 1284 (MCCLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Markets.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35328" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35328" title="827">
827

Year 827 (DCCCXXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Science.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35329" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35329" title="844">
844

Year 844 (DCCCXLIV) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35330" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35330" title="847">
847

Year 847 (DCCCXLVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35331" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35331" title="855">
855

Year 855 (DCCCLV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35332" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35332" title="810">
810

Year 810 (DCCCX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35333" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35333" title="809">
809

Year 809 (DCCCIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35334" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35334" title="808">
808

Year 808 (DCCCVIII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35335" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35335" title="807">
807

Year 807 (DCCCVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Science.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35336" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35336" title="806">
806

Year 806 (DCCCVI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35337" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35337" title="805">
805

Year 805 (DCCCV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35338" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35338" title="803">
803

Year 803 (DCCCIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35339" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35339" title="802">
802

Year 802 (DCCCII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35340" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35340" title="801">
801

Year 801 (DCCCI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35341" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35341" title="812">
812

Year 812 (DCCCXII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35347" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35347" title="102">
102

Year 102 (CII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ursus and Sura (or, less frequently, year 855 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 102 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Medicine.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35348" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35348" title="130s">
130s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35349" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35349" title="140s">
140s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35350" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35350" title="150s">
150s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35351" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35351" title="160s">
160s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35352" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35352" title="170s">
170s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35353" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35353" title="180s">
180s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35354" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35354" title="190s">
190s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35355" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35355" title="103">
103

Year 103 (CIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Traianus and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 856 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 103 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35356" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35356" title="104">
104

Year 104 (CIV) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Suburanus and Marcellus (or, less frequently, year 857 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 104 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35357" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35357" title="105">
105

Year 105 (CV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Candidus and Iulius (or, less frequently, year 858 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 105 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35358" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35358" title="106">
106

Year 106 (CVI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Commodus and Civica (or, less frequently, year 859 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 106 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35359" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35359" title="107">
107

Year 107 (CVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sura and Senico (or, less frequently, year 860 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 107 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35360" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35360" title="108">
108

Year 108 (CVIII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Trebonius and Bradua (or, less frequently, year 861 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 108 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35361" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35361" title="109">
109

Year 109 (CIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Palma and Tullus (or, less frequently, year 862 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 109 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35362" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35362" title="110">
110

Year 110 (CX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Priscinus and Scipio (or, less frequently, year 863 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 110 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35363" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35363" title="111">
111

Year 111 (CXI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Piso and Bolanus (or, less frequently, year 864 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 111 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35364" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35364" title="112">
112

Year 112 (CXII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Traianus and Cornelius (or, less frequently, year 865 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 112 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35365" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35365" title="113">
113

Year 113 (CXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Celsus and Crispinus (or, less frequently, year 866 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 113 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35366" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35366" title="114">
114

Year 114 (CXIV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hasta and Vopiscus (or, less frequently, year 867 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 114 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35367" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35367" title="115">
115

Year 115 (CXV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalla and Vergilianus (or, less frequently, year 868 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 115 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35368" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35368" title="116">
116

Year 116 (CXVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lamia and Vetus (or, less frequently, year 869 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 116 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35369" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35369" title="117">
117

Year 117 (CXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Niger and Apronianus (or, less frequently, year 870 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 117 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35370" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35370" title="118">
118

Year 118 (CXVIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hadrianus and Fuscus (or, less frequently, year 871 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 118 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35371" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35371" title="119">
119

Year 119 (CXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hadrianus and Rusticus (or, less frequently, year 872 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 119 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35372" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35372" title="120">
120

Year 120 (CXX) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Fulvus (or, less frequently, year 873 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 120 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35373" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35373" title="121">
121

Year 121 (CXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Verus and Augur (or, less frequently, year 874 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 121 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35375" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35375" title="123">
123

Year 123 (CXXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Paetinus and Apronius (or, less frequently, year 876 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 123 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35376" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35376" title="124">
124

Year 124 (CXXIV) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Glabrio and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 877 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 124 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35377" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35377" title="126">
126

Year 126 (CXXVI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Verus and Ambibulus (or, less frequently, year 879 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 126 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35378" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35378" title="127">
127

Year 127 (CXXVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rufus and Squilla (or, less frequently, year 880 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 127 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35379" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35379" title="128">
128

Year 128 (CXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calpurnius and Libo (or, less frequently, year 881 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 128 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35380" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35380" title="129">
129

Year 129 (CXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Celsus and Marcellus (or, less frequently, year 882 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 129 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35381" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35381" title="632">
632

Year 632 (DCXXXII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 632 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35382" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35382" title="633">
633

Year 633 (DCXXXIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 633 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35383" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35383" title="634">
634

Year 634 (DCXXXIV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 634 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35384" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35384" title="635">
635

Year 635 (DCXXXV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 635 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35385" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35385" title="636">
636

Year 636 (DCXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 636 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35386" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35386" title="637">
637

Year 637 (DCXXXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 637 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35387" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35387" title="638">
638

Year 638 (DCXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 638 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35388" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35388" title="639">
639

Year 639 (DCXXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 639 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35389" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35389" title="630">
630

Year 630 (DCXXX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 630 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35390" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35390" title="624">
624

Year 624 (DCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 624 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35391" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35391" title="625">
625

Year 625 (DCXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 625 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35392" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35392" title="626">
626

Year 626 (DCXXVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 626 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35393" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35393" title="627">
627

Year 627 (DCXXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 627 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Education.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35394" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35394" title="628">
628

Year 628 (DCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 628 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35395" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35395" title="629">
629

Year 629 (DCXXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 629 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35396" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35396" title="605">
605

Year 605 (DCV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 605 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Mesoamerica.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35397" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35397" title="607">
607

Year 607 (DCVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 607 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35398" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35398" title="608">
608

Year 608 (DCVIII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 608 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
Sui Dynasty Emperor Yang of Sui expressed the desire to control routes to the West, leading to two and a half centuries of Chinese military and trading activities in Central Asia.
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35399" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35399" title="609">
609

Year 609 (DCIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 609 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35400" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35400" title="603">
603

Year 603 (DCIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 603 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude> 
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35401" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35401" title="602">
602

Year 602 (DCII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 602 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35402" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35402" title="601">
601

Year 601 (DCI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 601 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35403" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35403" title="600">
600

Year 600 (DC) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 600 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
World.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35404" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35404" title="740">
740

Year 740 (DCCXL) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 740 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35405" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35405" title="743">
743

Year 743 (DCCXLIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 743 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35406" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35406" title="744">
744

Year 744 (DCCXLIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 744 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35407" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35407" title="745">
745

Year 745 (DCCXLV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 745 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35408" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35408" title="1758">
1758

Year 1758 (MDCCLVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35409" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35409" title="746">
746

Year 746 (DCCXLVI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 746 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35410" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35410" title="747">
747

Year 747 (DCCXLVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 747 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35411" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35411" title="748">
748

Year 748 (DCCXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 748 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35412" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35412" title="749">
749

Year 749 (DCCXLIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 749 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Catastrophe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35413" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35413" title="751">
751

Year 751 (DCCLI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 751 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35414" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35414" title="750">
750

Year 750 (DCCL) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 750 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Food and drink.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35415" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35415" title="753">
753

Year 753 (DCCLIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 753 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35416" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35416" title="1793">
1793

Year 1793 (MDCCXCIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar. The French Republic introduced the French Revolutionary Calendar starting with year I.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Undated.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35417" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35417" title="756">
756

Year 756 (DCCLVI) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 756 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Japan.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35418" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35418" title="758">
758

Year 758 (DCCLVIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 758 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35419" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35419" title="759">
759

Year 759 (DCCLIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 759 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35420" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35420" title="760">
760

Year 760 (DCCLX) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 760 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35421" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35421" title="761">
761

Year 761 (DCCLXI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 761 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35422" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35422" title="762">
762

Year 762 (DCCLXII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 762 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35423" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35423" title="763">
763

Year 763 (DCCLXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 763 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35424" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35424" title="764">
764

Year 764 (DCCLXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 764 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35425" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35425" title="765">
765

Year 765 (DCCLXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 765 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Agriculture.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35426" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35426" title="766">
766

Year 766 (DCCLXVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 766 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35427" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35427" title="767">
767

Year 767 (DCCLXVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 767 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35428" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35428" title="769">
769

Year 769 (DCCLXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 769 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35429" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35429" title="130">
130

Year 130 (CXXX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Catullinus and Aper (or, less frequently, year 883 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 130 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35430" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35430" title="131">
131

Year 131 (CXXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Laenas and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 884 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 131 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35431" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35431" title="132">
132

Year 132 (CXXXII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Serius and Sergianus (or, less frequently, year 885 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 132 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35432" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35432" title="133">
133

Year 133 (CXXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hiberus and Sisenna (or, less frequently, year 886 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 133 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Ongoing events.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35433" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35433" title="134">
134

Year 134 (CXXXIV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ursus and Varus (or, less frequently, year 887 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 134 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Architecture.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35434" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35434" title="135">
135

Year 135 (CXXXV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lupercus and Atilianus (or, less frequently, year 888 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 135 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35435" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35435" title="136">
136

Year 136 (CXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Commodus and Civica (or, less frequently, year 889 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 136 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35436" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35436" title="137">
137

Year 137 (CXXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Balbinus (or, less frequently, year 890 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 137 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35437" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35437" title="138">
138

Year 138 (CXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Niger and Camerinus (or, less frequently, year 891 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 138 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Commerce.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35438" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35438" title="139">
139

Year 139 (CXXXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hadrianus and Praesens (or, less frequently, year 892 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 139 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35439" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35439" title="70 BC">
70 BC

Year 70 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Magnus and Dives (or, less frequently, year 684 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 70 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Parthia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35440" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35440" title="140">
140

Year 140 (CXL) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hadrianus and Caesar (or, less frequently, year 893 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 140 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35441" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35441" title="141">
141

Year 141 (CXLI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Stloga (or, less frequently, year 894 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 141 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and Science.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35442" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35442" title="142">
142

Year 142 (CXLII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known in the Roman Empire as the Year of the Consulship of Pactumeius and Quadratus (or, less frequently, year 895 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 142 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35443" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35443" title="143">
143

Year 143 (CXLIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Torquatus and Hipparchus (or, less frequently, year 896 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 143 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
By place.
Roman Empire.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Medicine.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35444" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35444" title="144">
144

Year 144 (CXLIV) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rufus and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 897 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 144 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35445" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35445" title="145">
145

Year 145 (CXLV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hadrianus and Caesar (or, less frequently, year 898 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 145 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35446" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35446" title="146">
146

Year 146 (CXLVI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Clarus and Severus (or, less frequently, year 899 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 146 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35447" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35447" title="147">
147

Year 147 (CXLVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Messalinus and Largus (or, less frequently, year 900 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 147 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35448" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35448" title="148">
148

Year 148 (CXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cornelius and Calpernius (or, less frequently, year 901 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 148 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
The Emperor Antoninus Pius hosts a series of grand games to celebrate Rome's 900th anniversary.
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35449" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35449" title="149">
149

Year 149 (CXLIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scipio and Priscus (or, less frequently, year 902 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 149 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35450" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35450" title="770">
770

Year 770 (DCCLXX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 770 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35451" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35451" title="773">
773

Year 773 (DCCLXXIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 773 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Ecology.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35452" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35452" title="775">
775

Year 775 (DCCLXXV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 775 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Ecology.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35453" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35453" title="776">
776

Year 776 (DCCLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 776 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Britain.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35454" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35454" title="777">
777

Year 777 (DCCLXXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 777 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35455" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35455" title="778">
778

Year 778 (DCCLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 778 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35456" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35456" title="779">
779

Year 779 (DCCLXXIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 779 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35457" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35457" title="780">
780

Year 780 (DCCLXXX) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 780 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35458" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35458" title="781">
781

Year 781 (DCCLXXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 781 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35459" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35459" title="782">
782

Year 782 (DCCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 782 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35460" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35460" title="783">
783

Year 783 (DCCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 783 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude> 

</doc>
<doc id="35461" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35461" title="784">
784

Year 784 (DCCLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 784 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35462" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35462" title="785">
785

Year 785 (DCCLXXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The article denomination 785 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. It is still used today in this manner.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35463" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35463" title="786">
786

Year 786 (DCCLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 786 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35464" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35464" title="788">
788

Year 788 (DCCLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 788 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35465" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35465" title="789">
789

Year 789 (DCCLXXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 789 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35466" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35466" title="790">
790

Year 790 (DCCXC) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 790 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35467" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35467" title="791">
791

Year 791 (DCCXCI) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 791 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Africa.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35468" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35468" title="792">
792

Year 792 (DCCXCII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 792 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Britain.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35469" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35469" title="793">
793

Year 793 (DCCXCIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 793 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35470" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35470" title="794">
794

Year 794 (DCCXCIV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 794 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35471" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35471" title="796">
796

Year 796 (DCCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 796 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35472" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35472" title="797">
797

Year 797 (DCCXCVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 797 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Britain.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35473" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35473" title="798">
798

Year 798 (DCCXCVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 798 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35474" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35474" title="799">
799

Year 799 (DCCXCIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 799 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35475" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35475" title="813">
813

Year 813 (DCCCXIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
"813" may also refer to a duology of novels by Maurice Leblanc, starring his gentleman thief Arsène Lupin.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35476" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35476" title="815">
815

Year 815 (DCCCXV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35477" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35477" title="818">
818

Year 818 (DCCCXVIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35478" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35478" title="819">
819

Year 819 (DCCCXIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35479" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35479" title="820">
820

Year 820 (DCCCXX) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Science and technology.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35480" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35480" title="150">
150

Year 150 (CL) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Squilla and Vetus (or, less frequently, year 903 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 150 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35481" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35481" title="151">
151

Year 151 (CLI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Condianus and Valerius (or, less frequently, year 904 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 151 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Art.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35482" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35482" title="152">
152

Year 152 (CLII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Glabrio and Homullus (or, less frequently, year 905 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 152 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35483" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35483" title="153">
153

Year 153 (CLIII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rusticus and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 906 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 153 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35484" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35484" title="154">
154

Year 154 (CLIV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelius and Lateranus (or, less frequently, year 907 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 154 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35485" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35485" title="155">
155

Year 155 (CLV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 908 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 155 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35486" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35486" title="156">
156

Year 156 (CLVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Silvanus and Augurinus (or, less frequently, year 909 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 156 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35487" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35487" title="157">
157

Year 157 (CLVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Civica and Aquillus (or, less frequently, year 910 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 157 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
America.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35488" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35488" title="158">
158

Year 158 (CLVIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tertullus and Sacerdos (or, less frequently, year 911 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 158 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35489" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35489" title="159">
159

Year 159 (CLIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Quintillus and Priscus (or, less frequently, year 912 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 159 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35490" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35490" title="1781">
1781

Year 1781 (MDCCLXXXI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Friday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35491" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35491" title="1856">
1856

Year 1856 (MDCCCLVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a leap year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35492" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35492" title="270s">
270s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35493" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35493" title="271">
271

Year 271 (CCLXXI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aurelianus and Bassus (or, less frequently, year 1024 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 271 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35494" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35494" title="312">
312

Year 312 (CCCXII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantinus and Licinianus (or, less frequently, year 1065 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 312 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35495" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35495" title="324">
324

Year 324 (CCCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crispus and Constantinus (or, less frequently, year 1077 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 324 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35496" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35496" title="1799">
1799

1799 (MDCCXCIX) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35497" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35497" title="1277">
1277

Year 1277 (MCCLXXVII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35498" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35498" title="1471">
1471

Year 1471 (MCDLXXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35499" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35499" title="1506">
1506

Year 1506 (MDVI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35500" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35500" title="1498">
1498

Year 1498 (MCDXCVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
January–December.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35501" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35501" title="2038">
2038

2038 ()
will be .

</doc>
<doc id="35502" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35502" title="2002">
2002

2002 ()
will be .
The year 2002 was a palindrome, the first since 1991, which by coincidence, was also a common year that started on a Tuesday.
2002 was designated as:

</doc>
<doc id="35503" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35503" title="3Com">
3Com

3Com Corporation was a digital electronics manufacturer best known for its computer network infrastructure products. The company was co-founded in 1979 by Robert Metcalfe, Howard Charney, Bruce Borden, and Greg Shaw and recruited Bill Krause from HP to be its President in February 1981 when it raised its first round of venture capital. Metcalfe has explained that he came up with the name 3Com as a contraction of "Computer Communication Compatibility", with its focus on deploying the Ethernet technology that he had co-invented which enabled the networking of computers.
3Com provided network interface controllers and switches, routers, wireless access points and controllers, IP voice systems, and intrusion prevention systems. The company was based in Massachusetts, USA. From its 2007 acquisition of 100 percent ownership of H3C Technologies Co., Limited (H3C) —initially a joint venture with China-based Huawei Technologies—3Com achieved a leading market presence in China, and a significant networking market share in Europe, Asia, and the Americas. 3Com products were sold under the brands 3Com, H3C, and TippingPoint.
On April 12, 2010, Hewlett-Packard completed the acquisition of 3Com.
Since the HP acquisition, 3Com has been fully absorbed by HP and no longer exists as a separate entity.
History.
Before 3Com, PARC.
After reading an article on ALOHAnet, Bob Metcalfe became interested in the topic of computer networking. ALOHAnet was an over-the-air wide area network system using UHF radios and made several assumptions that Metcalfe thought would not be correct in practice. He developed his own theories of how to manage traffic, and began to consider an "ALOHAnet in a wire" networking system. In 1972 he joined Xerox PARC to develop these ideas, and after pairing up with David Boggs, the two had early 3 Mbit/s versions of Ethernet working in 1973. They then went on to build up a networking protocol known as Pup, with the entire system ready for build-out by late 1974.
At this point, Xerox management did nothing with it, even after being approached by prospective customers. Increasingly upset by management's lack of interest, Metcalfe left Xerox in 1975, but was lured back again the next year. Further development followed, resulting in the seminal Xerox Network Systems (XNS) protocol which was completed by 1978. Once again, Metcalfe found management was unwilling to actually do anything with the product, and threatened to leave. Nothing followed, and in 1979 he left the company.
Founding and early days (1979-1996).
Metcalfe subsequently co-founded 3Com in 1979. 3Com began making Ethernet adaptor cards for many early 1980s computer systems, including the LSI-11, IBM PC, and VAX-11. In the mid-1980s, 3Com branded their Ethernet technology as EtherSeries, while introducing a range of software and PC-based equipment to provide shared services over a local area network (LAN) using Xerox Network Systems (XNS) protocols. These protocols were branded EtherShare (for file sharing), EtherPrint (for printing), EtherMail (for email), and Ether-3270 (for IBM host emulation).
The company's network software products included:
3Com's expansion beyond its original base of PC and thin Ethernet products began in 1987 when it merged with Bridge Communications. This provided a range of equipment based on Motorola 68000 processors and using XNS protocols compatibly with 3Com's Etherterm PC software.
By 1995, 3Com's status was such that they were able to enter into an agreement with the city of San Francisco to pay $900,000 per year for the naming rights to Candlestick Park. That agreement ended in 2002.
1997-2000.
In 1997, 3Com merged with U.S. Robotics, a maker of dial-up modems, and owner of Palm, Inc.. U.S. Robotics was known for its Sportster line of consumer oriented modems, as well as its Courier business-class modem line. In addition to consumer network electronics, U.S. Robotics (USR) was a well-known manufacturer of a highly regarded dialup access server, the "Total Control Hub", rebadged by 3Com as the "Total Control 1000", based largely on its Courier modem technology. This key business product competed against Cisco's AS5200 access server line in the mid-1990s as the explosion of the Internet led to service provider investment in dialup access server equipment. 3Com continued the development of the Total Control line until it was eventually spun off as a Part of Commworks, which was then acquired by UTStarcom.
In August 1998, Bruce Claflin was named Chief Operations Officer. The modem business was rapidly shrinking. 3Com attempted to enter the DSL business, but was not successful.
In the lucrative server network interface card business, 3Com remained second in market share, after Intel. 3Com never managed to beat Intel with its own products or even with joint ventures with Broadcom . It started developing Gigabit Ethernet cards in-house but later scrapped the plans. Later, it formed a joint venture with Broadcom, where Broadcom would develop the main ASIC component and the NIC would be 3Com branded.
In 1999 3Com acquired NBX, a Boston company with an Ethernet-based phone system for small and medium-sized businesses. This product proved popular with 3Com's existing distribution channel and saw rapid growth and adoption. As one of the first companies to deliver a complete networked phone system, and increased its distribution channel with larger telephony partners such as Southwestern Bell and Metropark Communications, 3Com helped make VoIP into a safe and practical technology with wide adoption.
3Com tried to move into the smart consumer appliances business and on June 2000, 3Com acquired internet radio startup Kerbango for US$80 million. It developed its Audrey appliance, which made an appearance on "The Oprah Winfrey Show". It scrapped the Audrey and Kerbango products less than a year later.
In March 2000, in a highly public and criticized move, 3Com exited the high-end core routers and switch market to focus on other areas of the business. The CoreBuilder Ethernet and ATM LAN switches, PathBuilder and NetBuilder WAN Routers were all discontinued June 2000. CoreBuilder products and the customer base was migrated over to Extreme Networks. The PathBuilder and NetBuilder were transitioned to Motorola. 3Com focused its efforts from 2000 to 2003 on building up the HomeConnect, OfficeConnect, SuperStack, NBX and Total Control product lines. Due to this perceived exit from the Enterprise market, 3Com would never gain momentum with large customers or carriers again.
In July 2000, 3Com spun off Palm as an independent company. After the IPO, 3Com still owned 80% of Palm but 3Com's market capitalization was smaller than Palm's. U.S. Robotics was also spun out again as a separate company at this time.
2001 and beyond.
In January 2001, Claflin became Chief Executive Officer, replacing Eric Benhamou, CEO from 1990 to 2000. He was criticized for the costly diversification in the mobile handheld computer market.
At this point, the company's main cash-cow, the network interface card business, was also shrinking rapidly, mainly because the functionality was integrated into the southbridge of many motherboards. The company started slashing or selling divisions and going through numerous rounds of layoffs. The company went from employing more than 12,000 employees to fewer than 2,000.
In May 2003, the company moved its Silicon Valley Santa Clara headquarters to Marlborough, Massachusetts. It also formed a venture called H3C with Huawei whereby 3Com would sell and rebrand products under the joint venture.
In 2003, 3Com sold its CommWorks Corporation subsidiary to UTStarcom, Inc. CommWorks was based in Rolling Meadows, Illinois, and developed wireline telecommunications and wireless infrastructure technologies.
In January 2006, Claflin announced he would be leaving the company. In January 2006 R Scott Murray became CEO of 3Com and Chairman of H3C Technology in China, a joint venture with Huawei Technology. Murray voluntarily resigned from the company in August 2006 over his concerns about the questionable business ethics of Huawei and potential cyber security risks posed by Huawei. Edgar Masri returned to 3Com to head as President and CEO following Murray's departure..
In September 2007, Bain Capital agreed to buy the company for $2.2 billion, with minority equity financing from Huawei Technologies. However, the deal met with US government regulatory opposition and the deal fell through early 2008, following concerns over Huawei's risk of conducting cyber security threats against the United States Government and its allies, Huawei's former dealings in Iran, and Huawei being operated by a former general in China's People's Liberation Army. Edgar Masri left the company in April 2008, partially as a result of the failed Bain transaction.
In April 2008, Robert Mao was named Chief Executive Officer, and Ron Sege made President and Chief Operating Officer.
In fiscal year 2008 ended May 30, 2008, 3Com had annual revenue of $1.3 billion and more than 6,000 employees in over 40 countries. In September 2008, 3Com reported financial results for its fiscal 2009 first quarter, which ended August 29, 2008. Revenue in the quarter was $342.7 million compared to revenue of $319.4 million in the corresponding period in fiscal 2008, a 7 percent increase. Net income in the quarter was $79.8 million, or $0.20 per diluted share, compared with a net loss of $18.7 million, or $0.05 per share, in the first quarter of fiscal year 2008.
The company reported it had more than 2,700 engineers, with more than 1,400 U.S. and nearly 180 Chinese issued patents, more than 1050 pending Chinese applications as well as pending applications for 35 separate inventions outside of China that cover a wide range of networking technologies.
Acquisition by HP.
On November 11, 2009, 3Com and Hewlett-Packard announced that Hewlett-Packard will be acquiring 3Com for $2.7 billion in cash.
On April 12, 2010, Hewlett-Packard completed its acquisition of 3Com Corporation at a price of $7.90 per share in cash or an enterprise value of approximately $2.7 billion.
Products.
Acquisitions.
3Com came close to being acquired by Unix workstation company, Convergent Technologies, abandoning the pact just two days before a vote was scheduled in March 1986. Later, 3Com went on to acquire the following:
Former subsidiaries.
CommWorks Corporation was a subsidiary of 3Com Corporation, based in Rolling Meadows, Illinois. It was sold to UTStarcom, Inc. of Alameda, California in 2003.
CommWorks was formerly the Carrier Network Business unit of 3Com, comprising several acquired companies: U.S. Robotics (Rolling Meadows, Illinois), Call Technologies (Reston, Virginia), and LANsource (Toronto, Canada). CommWorks was able to use technology from each company to create IP softswitch and IP communications software. U.S. Robotics provided media gateways (the Total Control 1000 product line, formerly used for dial-modem termination) and softswitch technology. Call Technologies provided Unified Messaging software. LANsource provided fax-over-IP software that was integrated with the Unified Messaging platform.
The Carrier Network Business unit of 3Com developed an IWF solution which became the first and dominant 2G CDMA wireless data gateway product. In partnership with Unwired Planet (now Openwave) and Qualcomm Quicknet connect was launched allowing for a breakthrough of 6 second connect times versus the standard solution which required modems to connect the call (approximately 30+ seconds). This product solution was deployed successfully throughout the United States, Japan, and Korea covering the 2G CDMA market sample carriers included Sprint. It led to follow on products that became core to CommWorks now UTStarcom offerings including the 2.5 and 3G packet data gateway products known as PDSN and Home Agents.
CommWorks/3Com co-developed an H.323-based softswitch with AT&T in 1998 for use in a "transparent trunking" application for AT&T's residential long-distance customers. In this solution, long distance telephone calls were redirected from the LEC's ingress CLASS 5 switch to the Total Control 1000 media gateway, where it was converted from TDM to IP and transported across AT&T's WorldNet IP backbone. When it reached the destination, it was passed to the egress LEC's CLASS 5 switch as an untariffed data call.
CommWorks modified the gateway and softswitch software to support SIP for MCI/WorldCom's hosted business offering in 2000.
Although 3Com sold CommWorks to UTStarcom, they retained intellectual property rights to the softswitch technology. After modifying the software to enable enterprise PBX features, 3Com released this technology as VCX, the industry's first pure SIP PBX, in 2003.
References.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.
</dl>

</doc>
<doc id="35504" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35504" title="The 3DO Company">
The 3DO Company

The 3DO Company (formerly THDO on the NASDAQ stock exchange), also known as 3DO (short for three-dimensional operating system), was a video game company. It was founded in 1991 under the name SMSG, Inc. (for San Mateo Software Group) by Electronic Arts founder Trip Hawkins in a partnership with seven companies, including LG, Matsushita (now Panasonic), AT&T Corporation, MCA, Time Warner and Electronic Arts. After 3DO's flagship video game console, the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer, failed in the marketplace, the company exited the hardware business and became a third-party video game developer. It went bankrupt in 2003 due to poor sales of its games. Its headquarters were in Redwood City, California in the San Francisco Bay Area.
History.
Console developer.
When the company was first founded, its original objective was to create a next-generation CD-based video game system called the 3DO Interactive Multiplayer, which would be manufactured by various partners and licensees; 3DO would collect a royalty on each console sold and on each game manufactured. For game publishers, 3DO's $3 royalty per sold game was very low compared to the royalties Nintendo and Sega collected from game sales on their consoles. The launch of the console in October 1993 was well-promoted, with a great deal of attention in the mass media as part of the "multimedia wave" in the computer world.
The 3DO console launched in October 1993 at the price of $699. Poor console and game sales trumped the enticingly low royalty rate and proved a fatal flaw. While 3DO's business model attracted game publishers with its low royalty rates, it resulted in the console selling for a price higher than the Super Nintendo and Sega Genesis combined, hampering sales. While companies that manufactured and sold their own consoles could sell them, at a loss, for a competitive price, making up for lost profit through royalties collected from game publishers, the 3DO's manufacturers, not collecting any money from game publishers, and owing royalties to the 3DO Company, had to sell the console for a profit, resulting in high prices. As the console failed to compete with its cheaper competitors, game developers and publishers, while initially attracted by low royalties, dropped support for the console as its games failed to sell. Stock in the 3DO Company dropped from over $37 per share in November 1993 to $23 per share in late December. In October 1995, The 3DO Company sold its next generation console, M2, to Matsushita, and changed its business to develop and publish games for other game consoles and PC.
Third-party developer.
After abandoning the 3DO console, the company acquired Cyclone Studios, Archetype Interactive and New World Computing. The company's biggest hit was its series of "Army Men" games, featuring generic green plastic soldier toys. Its "Might and Magic" and especially "Heroes of Might and Magic" series from subsidiary New World Computing were perhaps the most popular among their games at the time of release. During the late 1990s, the company published one of the first 3D MMORPGs: "Meridian 59", which survives to this day in the hands of some of the game's original developers.
With the exception of its well-received "High Heat Baseball" franchise and "BattleTanx" games, most of the company's games were critically panned. After struggling for several years, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in May 2003. Trip Hawkins' questionable policy of rushing games to the market in 6 months did not pay off. Employees were laid off without pay, and the company's game brands and other intellectual properties were sold to rivals like Microsoft, Namco, Crave and Ubisoft, and also to founder Trip Hawkins, who paid $405,000 for rights to some old brands and the company's "Internet patent portfolio". Hawkins went on to found Digital Chocolate, a mobile-based gaming company.

</doc>
<doc id="35506" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35506" title="3Station">
3Station

The 3Station was a diskless workstation, developed by Bob Metcalfe at 3Com and first available in 1986. The 3Station/2E had a 10 MHz 80286 processor, 1 megabyte of RAM (expandable to 5MB), VGA-compatible graphics with 256kB of video RAM, and integrated AUI/BNC network transceivers for LAN access. The product used a single printed-circuit board with four custom ASICs. It had neither a floppy disk drive nor a hard disk; it was booted from a server and stored all end-user files there.
3Com advertised "significant cost savings" due to the 3Station's ease of installation and low maintenance (this would now be referred to under the banner of total cost of ownership). The 3Station's cost lay somewhere between that of an IBM PC clone and an IBM PC of the day. It was not commercially successful, nor were any of the similarly configured "low end" workstations that followed.
Typical customer for 3Stations.
3Stations's were sold as a package with a 3Server as a central hub. The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) were a significant customer for this setup (through Groupe Bull subsidiary Bull HN, née Honeywell), eventually purchasing many thousand 3Stations and associated 3Server machines. The network enabled the tax office to centrally control software versions from the Canberra office, distributing them Australia wide without the tedium and cost of updating thousands of independent, hard drive based PCs.
When the 286 processor became obsolete, the ATO opened a tender for replacement of the 3Station 2E with a suitable 386 based machine. The tender process was eventually won by Bull HN with a product labelled "3Station/386", but only shared the external case as a common part. 3Com had very little input into the design other than supplying technical help and access to networking chip sets. The internals were a custom designed single board based on the 3Com Etherlink II for networking, and ATI graphics. 3Station 2 and 3s were manufactured under license in Sydney until the contract ended.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35507" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35507" title="HTTP 404">
HTTP 404

The 404 or Not Found error message is an HTTP standard response code indicating that the client was able to communicate with a given server, but the server could not find what was requested.
The web site hosting server will typically generate a "404 Not Found" web page when a user attempts to follow a broken or dead link; hence the 404 error is one of the most recognizable errors users can find on the web.
Overview.
When communicating via HTTP, a server is required to respond to a request, such as a web browser's request for a web page, with a numeric response code and an optional, mandatory, or disallowed (based upon the status code) message. In the code 404, the first digit indicates a client error, such as a mistyped Uniform Resource Locator (URL). The following two digits indicate the specific error encountered. HTTP's use of three-digit codes is similar to the use of such codes in earlier protocols such as FTP and NNTP.
At the HTTP level, a 404 response code is followed by a human-readable "reason phrase". The HTTP specification suggests the phrase "Not Found" and many web servers by default issue an HTML page that includes both the 404 code and the "Not Found" phrase.
A 404 error is often returned when pages have been moved or deleted. In the first case, a better response is to return a 301 Moved Permanently response, which can be configured in most server configuration files, or through URL rewriting; in the second case, a 410 Gone should be returned. Because these two options require special server configuration, most websites do not make use of them.
404 errors should not be confused with DNS errors, which appear when the given URL refers to a server name that does not exist. A 404 error indicates that the server itself was found, but that the server was not able to retrieve the requested page.
Custom error pages.
Web servers can typically be configured to display a customised 404 error page, including a more natural description, the parent site's branding, and sometimes a site map, a search form or 404 page widget. The protocol level phrase, which is hidden from the user, is rarely customized.
Internet Explorer, however, will not display custom pages unless they are larger than 512 bytes, opting instead to display a "friendly" error page. Google Chrome includes similar functionality, where the 404 is replaced with alternative suggestions generated by Google algorithms, if the page is under 512 bytes in size.
Another problem is that if the page does not provide a favicon, and a separate custom 404 page exists, extra traffic and longer loading times will be generated on every page view.
Renny Gleeson with Weiden and Kennedy spoke at TED in 2012. Through a PIE initiative, Portland thinkers have been exploring ways to improve the emotional response to a 404 page experience. Companies like Groupon, that specialize in digital consumerism, have begun to utilize their ideas in order to personalise the consumer experience when they have reached a 'dead-end' while searching through products. These examples of 404 pages could be considered "quirky" as they do not reflect the company's own strategies, but feature irrelevant items to lower the formality of the page.
Tracking/Checking 404 errors.
A number of tools exist that crawl through a website to find pages that return 404 status codes. These tools can be helpful in finding links that exist within a particular website. The limitation of these tools is that they only find links within one particular website, and ignore 404s resulting from links on other websites. As a result, these tools miss out on 83% of the 404s on websites. One way around this is to find 404 errors by analyzing external links.
Another common method is tracking traffic to 404 pages using log file analysis. This can be useful to understand more about what 404s users reached on the site. Another method of tracking traffic to 404 pages is using JavaScript-based traffic tracking tools.
404 page widgets.
While many websites send additional information in a 404 error message—such as a link to the homepage of a website or a search box—some also endeavor to find the correct web page the user wanted. Extensions are available for some popular content management systems (CMSs) to do this.
In Europe, the NotFound project, created by multiple European organisations including Missing Children Europe and Child Focus, encourages site operators to add a snippet of code to serve customised 404 error pages which provide data about missing children.
Soft 404.
Some websites report a "not found" error by returning a standard web page with a "200 OK" response code; this is known as a soft 404. Soft 404s are problematic for automated methods of discovering whether a link is broken. Some search engines, like Yahoo, use automated processes to detect soft 404s. Soft 404s can occur as a result of configuration errors when using certain HTTP server software, for example with the Apache software, when an Error Document 404 (specified in a .htaccess file) is specified as an absolute path (e.g. http://example.com/error.html) rather than a relative path (/error.html).
Some proxy servers generate a 404 error when the remote host is not present, rather than returning the correct 500-range code when errors such as hostname resolution failures or refused TCP connections prevent the proxy server from satisfying the request. This can confuse programs that expect and act on specific responses, as they can no longer easily distinguish between an absent web server and a missing web page on a web server that is present.
In July 2004, the UK telecom provider BT Group deployed the Cleanfeed content blocking system, which returns a 404 error to any request for content identified as potentially illegal by the Internet Watch Foundation. Other ISPs return a HTTP 403 "forbidden" error in the same circumstances. The practice of employing fake 404 errors as a means to conceal censorship has also been reported in Thailand and Tunisia. In Tunisia, where censorship was severe before the 2011 revolution, people became aware of the nature of the fake 404 errors and created an imaginary character named "Ammar 404" who represents "the invisible censor".
Slang usage.
In 2008, a study carried out by the telecommunications arm of the Post Office found that "404" had become a slang synonym for "clueless" in the United Kingdom. Slang lexicographer Jonathon Green said that "404" as a slang term had been driven by the "influence of technology" and young people, but at the time, such usage was relatively confined to London and other urban areas.

</doc>
<doc id="35509" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35509" title="51-FORTH">
51-FORTH

51-FORTH is an implementation of the Forth programming language for the Intel 8051 microcontroller. It was created in 1989 by Scott Gehmlich of IDACOM Electronics (which was acquired by Hewlett-Packard in 1990), and sent to Giovanni Moretti of Massey University, from whom it was propagated widely. The original codice_1 package is available from many archive sites, along with several other implementations of Forth.
This implementation is subroutine-threaded, with about 20 words written in assembly language, and the complete system occupying a total of about 8K of RAM. It was cross-developed from a VAX to an RTX2000 Forth system connected to dual-ported RAM accessible to the microcontroller.
The sources and documentation are in the public domain.

</doc>
<doc id="35510" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35510" title="56 kbit/s line">
56 kbit/s line

A 56 kbit/s line is a digital connection capable of carrying 56 kilobits per second (kbit/s), or 56,000 bit/s, the data rate of a classical single channel digital telephone line in North America. In many urban areas, which have seen wide deployment of faster, cheaper technologies, 56 kbit/s lines are generally considered to be an obsolete technology.
The figure of 56 kbit/s is derived from its implementation using the same digital infrastructure used since the 1960s for digital telephony in the PSTN, which uses a PCM sampling rate of 8,000 Hz used with 8-bit sample encoding to encode analogue signals into a digital stream of 64,000 bit/s. 
However, in the T-carrier systems used in the U.S. and Canada, a technique called bit-robbing uses, in every sixth frame, the least significant bit in the time slot associated with the voice channel for Channel Associated Signaling (CAS). This effectively renders the lowest bit of the 8 speech bits unusable for data transmission, and so a 56 kbit/s line used only 7 of the 8 data bits in each sample period to send data, thus giving a data rate of 8000 Hz × 7 bits = 56 kbit/s.
See also.
This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.

</doc>
<doc id="35511" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35511" title="5ESS switch">
5ESS switch

The 5ESS Switch is a Class 5 telephone electronic switching system developed by Western Electric and now sold by Western Electric's descendant, Alcatel-Lucent. This digital central office telephone circuit switching system is used by many telecommunications service providers.
History.
The 5ESS Class 5 Switch first appeared in Seneca, Illinois (815 Area Code) in 25 March 1982, and slowly replaced the 1ESS switch and other electromechanical and analog systems in the 1980s and 1990s. The 5ESS was also used as a Class 4 telephone switch or as a mixed Class 4/5 in markets too small for a 4ESS switch. Approximately half of all US telephone exchanges are serviced by 5ESS switches. The 5ESS is also exported internationally, and manufactured outside of the US under license.
The development effort for 5ESS required 5000 employees, producing 100 million lines of code, with 100 million lines of header and makefiles. Evolution of the system took place over 20 years, while three releases were often being developed simultaneously (each taking about three years to develop).
A 5ESS-2000 version, introduced in the 1990s, increased the capacity of the switching module (SM), with more peripheral modules and more optical links per SM to the communications module (CM; see below). A follow-on version, the 5ESS-R/E, was in development during the late 1990s but did not reach market.
Lucent Technologies (now part of Alcatel-Lucent) was formerly the AT&T Network Systems division of AT&T, which in turn was formerly known as Western Electric. The 5ESS came to market as the Western Electric No. 5 ESS, later 5ESS, 5ESS-2000, 5E-XC and is marketed as the Alcatel-Lucent 5ESS.
Architecture.
The 5ESS switch has three main kinds of Modules: the AM is the Administrative Module, which contains the central computers; the CM is the Communications Module, which is the central time-divided switch of the system; and the SM is the Switching Module which in most exchanges makes up the majority of the equipment. The SM performs the multiplexing, analog/digital coding, and other work to interface with the outside world. Each has a controller, a small computer whose CPUs and memories, like most common equipment of the exchange, are duplicated for redundancy. Distributed system lessens the load on the Central Administrative Module (AM) or main computer. 
Power for all circuitry is distributed as −48VDC (nominal) and converted locally to logic or telephone voltages.
Switching Module (SM).
Each SM handles several hundred to a few thousand telephone lines or several hundred trunks or mixture thereof. Each has its own processors, also called Module Controllers, which perform most call handling processes, using their own memory boards. Originally the peripheral processors were to be Intel 8086, but those proved inadequate and the system was introduced with Motorola 68000 series processors. The name of the cabinet that houses this equipment was changed at the same time from Interface Module to Switching Module. 
Peripheral units are on shelves in the SM. In most exchanges the majority are Line Units (LU) and Digital Line Trunk Units (DLTU). Each SM has Local Digital Service Units (LDSU) to provide various services to lines and trunks in the SM, including tone generation and detection. Global Digital Service Units (GDSU) provide less-frequently used services to the entire exchange. The Time Slot Interchanger (TSI) in the SM uses random-access memory to delay each speech sample to fit into a time slot which will carry its call through the exchange to another or, in some cases, the same SM. 
T-carrier spans are terminated, originally one per card but in later models usually two, in Digital Line Trunk Units (DLTU) which concentrate their DS0 channels into the TSI. These may serve either interoffice trunks or, using Integrated Subscriber Loop Carrier, subscriber lines. Larger DS3 signals can also have their DS0 signals switched in Digital Network Unit SONET (DNUS) units, without demultiplexing them into DS1. 
Newer SM's have DNUS (DS3) and Optical OIU interfaces (OC12) with a large amount of capacity.
SMs have Dual Link Interface (DLI) cards to connect them by multi-mode optical fibers to the Communications Modules for time-divided switching to other SMs. These links may be short, for example within the same building, or may connect to SMs in remote locations. Calls among the lines and trunks of a particular SM needn't go through CM, and an SM located remotely can act as distributed switching, administered from the central AM. Each SM has two Module Controller/Time Slot Interchange (MCTSI) circuits for redundancy. 
In contrast to Nortel's DMS-100 which uses individual line cards with a codec, most lines are on two-stage analog space-division concentrators or "Line Units", which connect as many as 512 lines, as needed, to the 8 "Channel card"s that each contain 8 codecs, and to high-level service circuits for ringing and testing. Both stages of concentration are included on the same GDX (Gated Diode Access) board. Each GDX board serves 32 lines, 16 A links and 32 B links. Limited availability saves money with incompletely filled matrixes. The Line Unit can have up to 16 GDX boards connecting to the channel boards by shared B links, but in offices with heavier traffic for lines a lesser number of GDX boards are equipped.
ISDN lines are served by individual line cards in an ISLU (Integrated Services Line Unit).
Administrative Module (AM).
AM is a dual processor mini main frame computer of the AT&T 3B series, running UNIX-RTR. AM contains the hard drives and tape drives used to load and backup the central and peripheral processor software and translations. Disk drives were originally several 300 megabyte SMD multiplatter units in a separate frame. Now they consist of several redundant multi-gigabyte SCSI drives that each reside on a card. Tape drives were originally half inch open reel at 6250 bits per inch, which were replaced in the early 1990s with 4 mm Digital Audio Tape cassettes.
The Administrative Module is built on the 3B21D platform and is used to load software to the many microprocessors throughout the switch and to provide high speed control functions. It provides messaging and interface to control terminals. The AM of a 5ESS consists of the 3B20x or 3B21D processor unit, including I/O, disks, and tape drive units. Once the 3B21D has loaded the software into the 5ESS and the switch is activated, packet switching takes place without further action by the 3B21D. Because the processor has duplex hardware, one active side, and one standby side, a failure of one side of the processor will not necessarily result in a loss of switching.
Communication Module (CM).
The oddly named Communications Modules form the central time switch of the exchange. 5ESS runs on a Time-Space-Time (TST) topology in which the Time-Slot-Interchangers (TSI) in the Switching Modules (SM) assign each phone call to a time slot for routing through the CM.
CMs perform time-divided switching and are provided in pairs; each module (cabinet) belonging to Office Network and Timing Complex (ONTC) 0 or 1, roughly corresponding to the switch planes of other designs. Each SM has four optical fiber links, two connecting to a CM belonging to ONTC 0 and two to ONTC 1. Each optical link consists of two multimode optical fibers with ST connectors to plug into transceivers plugged into backplane wiring at each end. CMs receive time-multiplexed signals on the receive fiber and send them to the appropriate destination SM on the send fiber.
Very Compact Digital Exchange.
The VCDX (Very Compact Digital eXchange) was marketed to small telephone companies and was used in some instances as a large PBX. It consisted of a single Switching Module, had no Communications Module, and used a Sun Microsystems workstation, which was actually running a 3B20 processor emulation as its Administrative Module.
Signaling.
The 5ESS has two different signaling architectures: Common Network Interface (CNI) Ring and Packet Switching Unit (PSU) Based SS7 Signaling.
OAMP.
The system is administered through an assortment of teletypewriter "Channels" (also called the system console) such as the TEST channel and Maintenance channel. Typically provisioning is done either through a command line interface (CLI) called RCV:APPTEXT, or through the menu-driven RCV:MENU,APPRC program. RCV stands for Recent Change/Verification, and can be accessed through Switching Control Center System. Most service orders, however, are administered through Recent Change Memory Administration Center (RCMAC). In the international market, this terminal interface has localization to provide locale specific language and command name variations on the screen and printer output.

</doc>
<doc id="35514" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35514" title="1838">
1838

Year 1838 (MDCCCXXXVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35515" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35515" title="1836">
1836

Year 1836 (MDCCCXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35516" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35516" title="1835">
1835

Year 1835 (MDCCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35517" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35517" title="1834">
1834

Year 1834 (MDCCCXXXIV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35518" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35518" title="1832">
1832

Year 1832 (MDCCCXXXII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian Calendar and a leap year starting on Friday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35519" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35519" title="United Kingdom general election, 1997">
United Kingdom general election, 1997

"* Indicates boundary change – so this is a nominal figure"
"^ Figure does not include the speaker"
 John Major
Tony Blair
The United Kingdom general election of 1997 was held on 1 May 1997, more than five years after the previous election on 9 April 1992, to elect 659 members to the British House of Commons. Under the leadership of Tony Blair, the Labour Party ended its 18 years in opposition and won the general election with a landslide victory, winning 418 seats, the most seats the party has ever held. Blair, as a result, became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, a position he held until his resignation in 2007.
Under Blair's leadership, the Labour Party had adopted a more centrist policy platform under the name 'New Labour'. This was seen as moving away from the traditionally more left-wing stance of the Labour Party. Labour made several campaign pledges such as the creation of a National Minimum Wage, devolution referendums for Scotland and Wales and promised greater economic competence than the Conservatives, who were unpopular following the events of Black Wednesday in 1992. The Labour campaign was ultimately a success and the party returned an unprecedented 418 MPs and began the first of three consecutive terms for Labour in government. A record number of women were elected to parliament, 120, of whom 101 were Labour MPs. This was in part thanks to Labour's policy of using all-women shortlists.
The Conservative Party was led by incumbent Prime Minister John Major and ran their campaign emphasising falling unemployment and a strong economic recovery following the early 1990s recession. However, a series of scandals, party disunity over the European Union, the events of Black Wednesday and a desire of the electorate for change after 18 years of Tory rule all contributed to the Conservatives' worst defeat since 1906, with only 165 MPs elected to Westminster, as well as their lowest percentage share of the vote since 1832. The party was left with no seats whatsoever in Scotland or Wales, and many key Conservative politicians, including Defence Secretary Michael Portillo, Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, Trade Secretary Ian Lang, Scottish Secretary Michael Forsyth and former ministers Edwina Currie, Norman Lamont, David Mellor and Neil Hamilton all lost their parliamentary seats. Following the defeat, the Conservatives began the longest continuous spell in opposition in the history of the present day (post-Tamworth Manifesto) Conservative Party, and indeed the longest such spell for any incarnation of the Tories/Conservatives since the 1760s, lasting 13 years.
The Liberal Democrats, under Paddy Ashdown, returned 46 MPs to parliament, the most for any third party since 1929 and more than double the seats they got in 1992, despite a drop in popular vote. The Scottish National Party (SNP) returned 6 MPs, double their total in 1992.
As with all general elections since the early 1950s, the results were broadcast live on the BBC; the presenters were David Dimbleby, Peter Snow and Jeremy Paxman.
Overview.
The British economy had been in recession at the time of the 1992 election, which the Conservatives had won, and although the recession had ended within a year, events such as Black Wednesday had tarnished the Conservative government's reputation for economic management. Labour had elected John Smith as its party leader in 1992, however his death from heart attack in 1994 led the way for Tony Blair to become Labour leader. Blair brought the party closer to the political centre and abolished the party's Clause IV in their constitution, which had committed them to mass nationalisation of industry. Labour also reversed its policy on unilateral nuclear disarmament and the events of Black Wednesday allowed Labour to promise greater economic management under the Chancellorship of Gordon Brown. A manifesto, entitled New Labour, New Life For Britain was released in 1996 and outlined 5 key pledges:
Disputes within the Conservative government over European Union issues, and a variety of "sleaze" allegations had severely affected the government's popularity. Despite the strong economic recovery and substantial fall in unemployment in the four years leading up to the election, the rise in Conservative support was only marginal with all of the major opinion polls having shown Labour in a comfortable lead since late 1992.
Timing.
The previous Parliament first sat on 29 April 1992. The Parliament Act 1911 required at the time that each Parliament to be dissolved before the 5th anniversary of its first sitting, therefore the latest date the dissolution and the summoning of the next parliament could have been held on was 28 April 1997. The 1985 amendment of the Representation of the People Act 1983 requires that the election must take place on the 11th working day after the deadline for nomination papers, which in turn must be no more than six working days after the next parliament was summoned. Therefore the latest date the election could have been held on was 22 May 1997 (which happened to be a Thursday). British elections (and referenda) have been held on Thursdays by convention since the 1930s, but can be held on other working days.
Campaign.
Prime Minister John Major called the election on Monday 17 March 1997, ensuring the formal campaign would be unusually long, at six weeks (Parliament was dissolved on 8 April). The election was scheduled for 1 May, to coincide with the local elections on the same day. This set a precedent, as the three subsequent general elections have also been held alongside the May local elections. The Conservatives argued that a long campaign would expose Labour and allow the Conservative message to be heard. However, Major was accused of arranging an early dissolution to protect Neil Hamilton from a pending parliamentary report into his conduct: a report that Major had earlier guaranteed would be published before the election.
Conservative campaign.
The Conservatives started low in the polls, and had experienced great difficulties over the past 5 years, with polling often putting it some 40 points adrift of Labour. The Conservative campaign emphasised stability, as did its manifesto title 'You can only be sure with the Conservatives'. However, the campaign was beset by deep set problems, such as the rise of James Goldsmith's Referendum Party, advocating a referendum on continued membership of the European Union. The party threatened to take away many right leaning votes from the Conservatives. Meanwhile, there was also division amongst the Conservative cabinet, with Chancellor Ken Clarke describing the views of Home Secretary Michael Howard on Europe as 'paranoid and xenophobic nonsense'. The Conservatives also struggled to come up with a definitive theme to attack the Labour Party, with some strategists arguing for an approach which castigated Labour for 'stealing Tory clothes' (copying their positions), with others making the case for a more confrontational approach, stating that New Labour was just a facade for 'old Labour'. The Tony Blair 'Demon Eyes' poster was an example of the latter strategy. In any case, the campaign failed to gain much traction, and the Conservatives went down to a landslide defeat at the polls.
Labour campaign.
Labour ran a slick campaign, which emphasised the splits within the Conservative government, and argued that the country needed a more centrist administration. Labour ran a centrist campaign that was good at picking up dissatisfied Tory voters, particularly moderate and suburban ones. Tony Blair, highly popular, was very much the centrepiece of the campaign, and proved a highly effective campaigner. The Labour campaign was reminiscent of those of Bill Clinton for the US Presidency, focusing on centrist themes, as well as adopting policies more commonly associated with the right, such as cracking down on crime and fiscal responsibility.
Liberal Democrat campaign.
The Liberal Democrats had suffered a disappointing performance in 1992, but they were very much strengthened in 1997 due to potential tactical voting between Labour and Lib Dem supporters in Tory marginal constituencies, particularly in the south. The Lib Dems promised to increase education funding.
Notional 1992 election.
The election was fought under new boundaries, with a net increase of eight seats compared to the 1992 election (651 to 659). Changes listed here are from the notional 1992 result, had it been fought on the boundaries established in 1997. These notional results were used by all media organisations at the time.
Results.
Labour won a landslide victory with their largest parliamentary majority (179) to date. On the BBC's election night programme Professor Anthony King described the result of the exit poll, which accurately predicted a Labour landslide, as being akin to "an asteroid hitting the planet and destroying practically all life on Earth". After years of trying the Labour Party had convinced the electorate that they would usher in a new age of prosperity—their policies, organisation and tone of optimism slotting perfectly into place.
Labour's victory was largely credited to the charisma of Tony Blair and a Labour public relations machine managed by Alastair Campbell. Between the 1992 election and the 1997 election there had also been major steps to modernise the party, including scrapping Clause IV that had committed the party to extending public ownership of industry. New Labour had suddenly seized the middle ground of the political spectrum, attracting voters much further to the right than their traditional working class or left-wing support. Famously, in the early hours of 2 May 1997 a party was held at the Royal Festival Hall, in which Blair stated triumphantly that "a new dawn has broken, has it not?".
The election was a crushing defeat for the Conservative Party, with the party having its lowest percentage share of the popular vote since 1832 under the Duke of Wellington's leadership, being wiped out in Scotland and Wales. A number of prominent Conservative MPs lost their seats in the election, including Michael Portillo, Malcolm Rifkind, Edwina Currie, David Mellor, Neil Hamilton and Norman Lamont. Such was the extent of Conservative losses at the election that Cecil Parkinson, speaking on the BBC's election night programme, remarked upon the Conservatives winning their second seat that he was pleased that the subsequent election for the leadership would be contested.
The election was a massive success for the Liberal Democrats, who more than doubled their number of seats thanks to the use of tactical voting against the Conservatives. Although their share of the vote fell slightly, their total of 46 MPs was the highest since Lloyd George got 59 seats in 1929.
The Referendum Party, which sought a referendum on the United Kingdom's relationship with the European Union, came fourth in terms of votes with 800,000 votes mainly from former Conservative voters , but won no seats in parliament. The six parties with the next highest votes stood only in either Scotland, Northern Ireland or Wales; in order, they were the Scottish National Party, the Ulster Unionist Party, the Social Democratic and Labour Party, Plaid Cymru, Sinn Féin, and the Democratic Unionist Party.
In the previously safe seat of Tatton, where incumbent Conservative MP Neil Hamilton was facing charges of having taken cash for questions, the Labour and Liberal Democrat Parties decided not to field candidates in order that an Independent candidate, Martin Bell, would have a better chance of winning the seat, which he duly did with a comfortable margin.
The result declared for the constituency of Winchester showed a margin of victory of just two votes for the Liberal Democrats. The defeated Conservative candidate mounted a successful legal challenge to the result on the grounds that errors by election officials (failures to stamp certain votes) had changed the result, the court ruled the result invalid and ordered a by-election on 20 November which was won by the Liberal Democrats with a much larger majority, causing much recrimination in the Conservative Party about the decision to challenge the original result in the first place.
This election would also mark the start of Labour government for the next 13 years until the formation of the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition in 2010.
"All parties with more than 500 votes shown. Labour total includes New Labour and "Labour Time for Change" candidates; Conservative total includes candidates in Northern Ireland (excluded in some lists) and "Loyal Conservative" candidate.
The Popular Unionist MP elected in 1992 died in 1995 and the party folded shortly afterwards.
There was no incumbent Speaker in the 1992 election."
Conservative MPs who lost their seats.
Constituencies given are those contested in 1997, rather than those held prior to the election - Norman Lamont, for example, had previously represented Kingston upon Thames in London.
Post election events.
The poor results for the Conservative Party led to infighting, with the One Nation, Tory Reform Group, and right wing Maastricht rebels blaming each other for the defeat. Party chairman Brian Mawhinney said on the night of the election, that it was due to disillusionment with 18 years of Conservative rule. John Major resigned as party leader, saying "When the curtain falls, it is time to leave the stage".
Despite receiving fewer votes than in 1992, the Liberal Democrats more than doubled their number of seats and won their best general election result since 1929 under David Lloyd George's leadership. Paddy Ashdown's continued leadership had been vindicated, despite a disappointing 1992 election, and they were in a position to build positively as a strong third party into the new millennium.
Internet coverage.
With the huge rise in internet use since the previous general election, BBC News created a special website covering the election as an experiment for the efficiency of an online news service which was due for a launch later in the year.

</doc>
<doc id="35520" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35520" title="1825">
1825

Year 1825 (MDCCCXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35521" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35521" title="1824">
1824

Year 1824 (MDCCCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Tuesday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35522" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35522" title="1820">
1820

Year 1820 (MDCCCXX) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Thursday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35523" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35523" title="1783">
1783

Year 1783 (MDCCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35524" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35524" title="2004">
2004

2004 ()
will be .
2004 was designated as:

</doc>
<doc id="35528" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35528" title="1537">
1537

Year 1537 (MDXXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35529" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35529" title="1592">
1592

Year 1592 (MDXCII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 10-day slower Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35530" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35530" title="1057">
1057

Year 1057 (MLVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35531" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35531" title="1816">
1816

Year 1816 (MDCCCXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a leap year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar. This year was known as the 'Year Without a Summer' because of low temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere, the result of the Mount Tambora volcanic eruption in Indonesia in 1815.

</doc>
<doc id="35540" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35540" title="245">
245

Year 245 (CCXLV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Philippus and Titianus (or, less frequently, year 998 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 245 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35541" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35541" title="313">
313

Year 313 (CCCXIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantinus and Licinianus (or, less frequently, year 1066 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 313 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. This year is notable for ending of the persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35542" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35542" title="1711">
1711

Year 1711 (MDCCXI) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 11-day slower Julian calendar. In the Swedish calendar it was a common year starting on Sunday, one day ahead of the Julian and ten days behind the Gregorian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
Date unknown.
</onlyinclude>
Deaths.
Date unknown

</doc>
<doc id="35543" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35543" title="1130">
1130

Year 1130 (MCXXX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35544" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35544" title="1143">
1143

Year 1143 (MCXLIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35545" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35545" title="1124">
1124

Year 1124 (MCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Middle East.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35546" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35546" title="417">
417

Year 417 (CDXVII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Constantius (or, less frequently, year 1170 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 417 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35547" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35547" title="418">
418

Year 418 (CDXVIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1171 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 418 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35548" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35548" title="422">
422

Year 422 (CDXXII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1175 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 422 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35549" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35549" title="1144">
1144

Year 1144 (MCXLIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35550" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35550" title="440">
440

Year 440 (CDXL) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valentinianus and Anatolius (or, less frequently, year 1193 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 440 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35551" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35551" title="007 (disambiguation)">
007 (disambiguation)

007 is a code name of James Bond, a fictional character.
007 may also refer to:

</doc>
<doc id="35552" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35552" title="1817">
1817

Year 1817 (MDCCCXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Monday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35584" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35584" title="817 BC">
817 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35585" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35585" title="751 BC">
751 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35586" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35586" title="730 BC">
730 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35587" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35587" title="715 BC">
715 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35588" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35588" title="663 BC">
663 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35589" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35589" title="656 BC">
656 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35590" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35590" title="525 BC">
525 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35591" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35591" title="398 BC">
398 BC

Year 398 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Potitus, Medullinus, Lactucinus, Fidenas, Camillus and Cornutus (or, less frequently, year 356 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 398 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Sicily.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35592" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35592" title="378 BC">
378 BC

Year 378 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Medullinus, Fidenas, Lanatus, Siculus, Pulvillus and Macerinus (or, less frequently, year 376 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 378 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35593" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35593" title="341 BC">
341 BC

Year 341 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Venno and Privernas (or, less frequently, year 413 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 341 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35594" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35594" title="141 BC">
141 BC

Year 141 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caepio and Pompeius (or, less frequently, year 613 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 141 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Syria and Judea.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35595" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35595" title="132 BC">
132 BC

Year 132 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Laenas and Rupilius (or, less frequently, year 622 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 132 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Mexico.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35596" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35596" title="129 BC">
129 BC

Year 129 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tuditanus and Aquillius (or, less frequently, year 625 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 129 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Astronomy.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35597" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35597" title="105 BC">
105 BC

Year 105 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rufus and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 649 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 105 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Republic.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35598" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35598" title="104 BC">
104 BC

Year 104 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Fimbria (or, less frequently, year 650 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 104 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35599" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35599" title="103 BC">
103 BC

Year 103 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Orestes (or, less frequently, year 651 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 103 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Judea.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35600" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35600" title="102 BC">
102 BC

Year 102 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Catulus (or, less frequently, year 652 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 102 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35601" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35601" title="101 BC">
101 BC

Year 101 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Aquillius (or, less frequently, year 653 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 101 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Libya.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35602" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35602" title="14 BC">
14 BC

Year 14 BC was either a common year starting on Thursday or Friday or a leap year starting on Wednesday, Thursday or Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Tuesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crassus and Lentulus (or, less frequently, year 740 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 14 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35603" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35603" title="330">
330

Year 330 (CCCXXX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Gallicanus and Tullianus (or, less frequently, year 1083 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 330 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35604" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35604" title="376">
376

Year 376 (CCCLXXVI) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valens and Augustus (or, less frequently, year 1129 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 376 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35605" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35605" title="378">
378

Year 378 (CCCLXXVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valens and Augustus (or, less frequently, year 1131 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 378 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35606" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35606" title="395">
395

 
Year 395 (CCCXCV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Olybrius and Probinus (or, less frequently, year 1148 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 395 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35607" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35607" title="402">
402

Year 402 (CDII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Arcadius and Honorius (or, less frequently, year 1155 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 402 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35608" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35608" title="408">
408

Year 408 (CDVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Bassus and Philippus (or, less frequently, year 1161 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 408 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Medicine.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35609" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35609" title="409">
409

Year 409 (CDIX) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1162 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 409 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35610" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35610" title="406">
406

Year 406 (CDVI) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Arcadius and Probus (or, less frequently, year 1159 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 406 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35611" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35611" title="412">
412

Year 412 (CDXII) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1165 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 412 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35612" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35612" title="414">
414

Year 414 (CDXIV) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Constantius and Constans (or, less frequently, year 1167 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 414 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35613" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35613" title="415">
415

Year 415 (CDXV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1168 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 415 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35614" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35614" title="427">
427

Year 427 (CDXXVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hierus and Ardabur (or, less frequently, year 1180 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 427 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Asia.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35615" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35615" title="434">
434

Year 434 (CDXXXIV) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aspar and Areobindus (or, less frequently, year 1187 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 434 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35616" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35616" title="436">
436

Year 436 (CDXXXVI) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Isodorus and Senator (or, less frequently, year 1189 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 436 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35617" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35617" title="439">
439

Year 439 (CDXXXIX) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Festus (or, less frequently, year 1192 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 439 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35618" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35618" title="443">
443

Year 443 (CDXLIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Maximus and Paterius (or, less frequently, year 1196 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 443 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35619" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35619" title="450">
450

Year 450 (CDL) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Valentinianus and Avienus (or, less frequently, year 1203 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 450 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Exploration and Colonization.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35627" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35627" title="1811">
1811

Year 1811 (MDCCCXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Gregorian calendar and a common year starting on Sunday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar.

</doc>
<doc id="35628" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35628" title="648 BC">
648 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35629" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35629" title="407">
407

Year 407 (CDVII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Theodosius (or, less frequently, year 1160 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 407 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35630" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35630" title="404">
404

Year 404 (CDIV) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Honorius and Aristaenetus (or, less frequently, year 1157 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 404 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35631" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35631" title="403">
403

Year 403 (CDIII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Rumoridus (or, less frequently, year 1156 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 403 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35632" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35632" title="401">
401

Year 401 (CDI) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Vincentius and Fravitus (or, less frequently, year 1154 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 401 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35633" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35633" title="400">
400

Year 400 (CD) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Stilicho and Aurelianus (or, less frequently, year 1153 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 400 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35634" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35634" title="399">
399

Year 399 (CCCXCIX) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Eutropius and Theodorus (or, less frequently, year 1152 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 399 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35635" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35635" title="398">
398

Year 398 (CCCXCVIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Eutychianus (or, less frequently, year 1151 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 398 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35636" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35636" title="396">
396

Year 396 (CCCXCVI) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Augustus (or, less frequently, year 1149 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 396 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
China.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35637" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35637" title="394">
394

Year 394 (CCCXCIV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Flavianus without colleague (or, less frequently, year 1147 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 394 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. 
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35638" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35638" title="393">
393

Year 393 (CCCXCIII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Augustus (or, less frequently, year 1146 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 393 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35639" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35639" title="392">
392

Year 392 (CCCXCII) was a leap year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 1145 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 392 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Roman Empire.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35640" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35640" title="391">
391

Year 391 (CCCXCI) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tatianus and Symmachus (or, less frequently, year 1144 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 391 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35641" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35641" title="390">
390

Year 390 (CCCXC) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Neoterius (or, less frequently, year 1143 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 390 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35642" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35642" title="390s">
390s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35643" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35643" title="410s">
410s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35644" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35644" title="440s">
440s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35645" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35645" title="460s">
460s

This is a list of events occurring in the 0s, ordered by year.
 

</doc>
<doc id="35646" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35646" title="862">
862

Year 862 (DCCCLXII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35647" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35647" title="667 BC">
667 BC


</doc>
<doc id="35648" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35648" title="100 BC">
100 BC

Year 100 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marius and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 654 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 100 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
America.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35649" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35649" title="44 BC">
44 BC

Year 44 BC was either a common year starting on Sunday or Monday or a leap year starting on Friday or Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Sunday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Antony (or, less frequently, year 710 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 44 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By place.
Europe.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35650" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35650" title="411">
411

Year 411 (CDXI) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius without colleague (or, less frequently, year 1164 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 411 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
<doc id="35651" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35651" title="413">
413

Year 413 (CDXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Herclianus and Lucius (or, less frequently, year 1166 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 413 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Religion.
</onlyinclude>
References.
413 - Also a widely known reference in Homestuck, due to the fact that Homestuck started on 4/13.

</doc>
<doc id="35652" url="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35652" title="416">
416

Year 416 (CDXVI) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Theodosius and Palladius (or, less frequently, year 1169 "Ab urbe condita"). The denomination 416 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Events.
<onlyinclude>
By topic.
Arts and Sciences.
</onlyinclude>

</doc>
